And I can see Ben there and Stuart as
well. Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have twenty minutes with us, so take your submission as
read. But if you'd like to, kick off by talking us through the
main points, and then we can open up for questions.
So we'll hand it over to you.
Oh, Ben, you're just on mute there.
You just got to, turn on your audio.
We'll try that one.
There we go.
Good morning all.
We can hear you. Good morning.
Morning Catherine, and thank you for the opportunity to be here this morning.
So yes, my name is Ben Itzla. I'm the Chair of Catchment Communities
Aotearoa. Uh, so a little bit on me.
I'm a sheep and beef farmer from the Hurunui and, as well as being involved
with catchment groups for the last ten years, have been involved with, in
the ECAN Zone Committee process. So, coming up with
community lead solutions leading into, the old RMA
f- flip, planning framework, so some experience there.
Um, but yes, so Catchment Communities Aotearoa is a membership
organization representing approximately two hundred and twenty
catchment groups across the country.
Uh, and those groups covering some twelve million hectares of, of farmed
land, in, in New Zealand.
So, I guess the,
just a bit of background, the evolution of catchment groups is quite interesting,
just how they're evolving right now from what started as mainly
smaller groups with single issues, in a catchment addressing
water quality mainly. They are now,
amalgamating, you might say, into coming under bigger umbrella
organizations, some covering, whole provinces.
So Thriving Southland and Taranaki Catchment Collective would be two good
examples where there is an umbrella organization
with still the smaller, local connected
catchment groups underneath them.
Um, and this is a really good model because it maintains the grassroots
connection, which is so important for, the action these groups takes, but
also gives them a bit more of a structure and some support around,
the administration side of things.
But, also, gives them the ability to
interact with, planning processes and other organizations
where it's, where it's applicable.
So,
and I guess, yeah, these groups are also really looking at the whole range of
environmental factors now. So not just water quality, but a huge amount of work on
biodiversity, as, as well,
and together with community work, bringing communities together
and building resilience. Um, look, so the real
essence of our submission is to ask that a community lead
approaches and collective approaches, are not only
part of these two new bills, but, are, are
pri-prioritized in the working of them in terms of coming up
with solutions or coming up with how we're going to,
to address the environmental issues that we need
to. Um, so that's not to say we don't need a regulatory framework.
We absolutely do. But we are asking that,
that the community approach, the collective approach is given
priority at the front end of these processes
to give the community an opportunity to come together and create their own
solution and therefore own it, because that is so much more powerful
than just relying on rules alone to make behavior
change. So areas where this approach
is applicable
is obviously in the development of, natural environment
plans. Um,
giving the community the ability to feed into those, whether it's through catchment
groups or other organizations, empowers them,
to understand why and, and a- and
develop actions that can address the issues
across a range, a whole range of factors.
Um, obviously the Section sixty, sixty-five talks about action
plans. I mean, this is really key and we really like
the way and wanna, wanna promote th- th- this concept,
but also really, emphasize, the
need, for the community input into that through
catchment groups and those type of organizations.
Um, but, and, and also make the point that this
mechanism should be used even in areas where there is real
environmental pressure or even over allocation, because giving
the, the opportunity to the community first to come up with a
solution is more powerful. Obviously, if they can't come up with that
solution or it's not deemed to be an effective solution, well
then it has to go back to a regulator to come up with a, with another
way forward. But, giving that first opportunity
to, to community groups, catchment groups,
is a way to bring the community with you and get them, involved
and on side. Um, obviously setting of limits, environmental
limits, fully accept that, national health limits
are, you know, need to be set at a national level.
But there needs to be regional or local input
into the setting of environmental limits to make them appropriate to
the, the natural environment, the geography, the land use,
and, and, and the local people's expectation, making them
achievable, and, a-and having reasonable time frames to
achieve that outcome and to that. Um,
so
I guess,
I think there's a real opportunity here for, the
same approach. I mean, biodiversity is a really good example of how
this, a more collective, a more community lead approach can be very
effective. I mean, biodiversity doesn't sit within catchments,
and catchment groups, community approaches have the ability to address
it across a whole area, across, in a, in a much more
larger scale. Um, you know, we need to think of
corridors for biodiversity, so if groups of,
um-Catchment groups, groups of landowners, communities can come
together and propose management plans to address their
biodiversity issues, then, they should be given
weight, because, you know,
compared to a more protectionist approach we've tried to take in the past, which is
essentially, you know, putting a fence around areas and,
and, and, and h- hoping that that does the job.
We know that, we need to manage good outcomes in terms of
weeds, pests, if we're gonna get the outcomes we need.
So you need people to do the management, and you need them involved,
whereas a straight rules-based approach doesn't foster that and it often
actually makes that biodiversity, more of a
liability, than an asset in the eyes of the
landowner, which is, is detrimental.
Um,
all these things, farm plans are a really key part of,
how you interact with your community, how you interact with landowners.
So we'd ask that, that the
catchment collectives are recognized as the, a, the,
a good place, the best place to start with rolling out farm plans.
Many catch farmers, landowners already have a farm plan developed through a
catchment group and have interacted with them to do that.
So it's the logical place they will go back to in the future
to, to satisfy any, additional
requirements of, of, of the new f- for, certified
freshwater farm plans.
Uh, so we'd like to see that. I mean, there's not a lot of detail in, in how
the farm plans will exact- will roll out and be,
implemented. So bringing,
using catchment collectives as part of that is, is a really
key, for us.
Um, so I mean, yeah, that's...
A- and also final point, and is just to really reiterate the comments from,
Simon Upton, Commissioner for the Environment, around the standardizing of
protocols and methodology for monitoring the environment.
Um, there's a huge range of different tests and different
methodologies used across the country.
It makes it very difficult to, to
quantify how we're doing. Um, and it-- if we
could have standard protocols and standard, methodologies for
monitoring the environment, it would also allow a lot of other groups...
I mean, some catchment groups are doing a huge amount of water testing, for
example, across the country. But i- in some instances, it's
not clear
h- how, relevant that work will be given it doesn't
match with, or there is not a standard that it,
a, a, a, a, a uniform standard across the country where it can be used.
So if that was standardized and agreed,
then, it would bring a lot more information to the table, as
well as allowing a lot more comparison across the
country, which would obviously be very
useful. Um,
I'd think our final point is just with, any
collaborative process, any community process, it needs, that process needs to
be given more weight through the, as it, well, what we used to call the
RMA process. But as it moves forward, one of the
most disempowering things is for a community to come together and thrash out
some, what are some really difficult conversations about
allocation, about, you know, land use.
These are tough con- conversations.
But then if it's not respected as it goes forward,
and, those with big budgets from outside the district
can come in and unduly influence that plan and change it
materially, then that completely disempowers the
people who put it together, who put their, um their heart and their soul
and their time into coming up with a solution for themselves to have it
then transformed into something that's quite different,
is, is, is incredibly disengaging.
And that has happened many times under the old system.
Um, and I've been involved in those processes.
So if we're going to ask communities to come together to form
solutions, we need to give those solutions weight and, and,
and let them be taken through. Um, obviously,
they still need to be accountable, and that's the council's job, to monitor the
environment and make sure those plans are effective.
And there will be another planning, solution, process down the
track, and that may need to change.
But we need to respect those, plans in the first
instance. So look, I'll leave it there.
And obviously, yeah, I'm happy to answer questions on any of that.
And, yeah.
Look, thank you, Ben, for that oversight and for your
submission. Uh, a really interesting area, obviously, catchment groups and the
involvement and the amazing work that you do across the country.
Look, we've got a couple of questions. We'll go to Rachel Brooking first.
Oh, look, I'd
say
I,
I
would... So one step back. So k- the requirements need
to be commensurate to the environmental pressure in that,
that catchment. So if I was holding the pen, particularly
in, lower risk catchments, then
a, a, a farm plan developed as part of a catchment
group,
th- that would negate the need for a certifier, is the wording
currently. Um, and there can be ways of
having checks and balances in that process to give
everyone, certainty that those farmers are, are, you
know, actually taking the process seriously without auditing
every farmer, because that's a significant cost in an area
where, some areas where there is li- little envi- you know, not as much
environmental pressure. So that's one thing.
Um-And more and higher... I mean, there's some really good examples in
Canterbury about, much more onerous, audited self-management
system where, there's agreements with the regulator in terms of what's in those
plans and what needs to happen, and are audited on a more, stringent
basis. So, but it's allowing the catchment
community, the catchment group to be part of developing those plans,
which really gives good, catchment context and rolling them
out, obviously with appropriate checks and balances based
on the environmental pressure in the area.
So that's, quickly how I would describe it.
And just quickly there, so, would your focus then...
So you just talked about the development of the plans, but also that the audit
would be sort of via the catchment group process rather than
farm by f- farm in a low risk environment.
In a low risk area, yes. You, there's two ways you could do it.
You could audit the catchment group process, which would
involve looking at some plans, or you could order a sub set- set of
farmers on a, you know, an annual basis,
just, you know... So there's a number of ways you could structure something that's
not asking everyone to go through that process regularly to
give, assurance that that catchment group is, is
taking the, you know, doing it properly.
Thank you. Look, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Thanks. Uh, just to follow on, on the, freshwater plans.
Uh, we had some submissions yesterday talking about they were keen to have
freshwater plans replace resource consents.
I don't think we're gonna get there, you know, like for like on
everything, but what's your view around the intersection of freshwater
plans, resource consents?
Oh, look, there's certainly a place where that is absolutely
applicable and, and some, like, I mean, okay, winter grazing would be an
example of, of a good area that if there's a good winter plan, or, sorry, a good
farm plan in place that, that talks well to how the winter
grazing is managed, but then, then that a really good
example of why then you shouldn't need a, a consent as well.
But when you, when you go through to, consents
to take water, for example, I can't see how that can really fit into
a, a farm planning scenario. So a bit of a horses
for courses, but yes, in terms of,
yeah, winter grazing, biodiversity
management, a lot of, more management
type scenarios, then absolutely.
Um, but it is a case by case basis.
Yeah, no, thank you. And just on, in your submission, a key component
that stood out was lack of a formal recognition for catchment groups
and, or, you know, w- you weren't, I guess, captured by interested
parties. So do you think that needs to be in this primary
legislation, or are you, would you be happy if it came through in the next phase
with the national direction and, and the policy?
Look, I think th- they do need to be recognized, and that's what we asked for
initially. So it's about inserting it in the appropriate place.
Um, it's key to realize that our
bigger, give, give the catchment groups the
option and recognize them formally for a start, I think is
really important. Not all catchment groups have the capacity to be fully involved
in a planning process now. But, I believe
going forward, that will become more prominent.
Um, and, if those that take up the option
will be very valuable to be in those.
So
I, I, I think that would be... I mean, I'm not a, I don't write plans, but,
recognizing them in the process is paramount for them to be effective going
forward.
Thank you.
Just a quick sup on that. Do most farmers,
have their catchment groups involved in their freshwater
farm plans? Is that, is that a standard practice across New
Zealand?
It is very, very common. Um, so I mean,
in the more, I guess, where there's more
environmental pressure, then, farm plans have been mandated and
it's been all, you know, different consultants and a number of different
organizations who have rolled out farm plans and obviously supported by industry
bodies. But for huge areas of the country, the, the f- the,
catchment group has been the primary vehicle for rolling out farm plans
because they've been voluntary, and they're obviously an incredibly good tool for
farmers to understand their environment and the actions they can take.
So I would say, I don't have numbers on it, but I would say the majority
of farm plans in the country have been rolled out with support from catchment
groups, the by clear majority. So naturally, those
farmers will then go back to the catchment group.
Mm.
Whenever new regulations or whenever new requirements for those farm plans come
about, the first person they will ring or get in contact with
is the catchment group who they trust and who helped them set that up in the
first place.
Oh, good. Good. Um, okay. Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Good morning, Ben. Um, my question is, yes, Dairy
NZ presented yesterday, and, amongst their submission, they highlight the fact
that measuring the out- the impact of on, on
farming from, on a catchment scale is quite accurate,
versus farm by farm is less accurate, and that's been shown to
be the case. How do you address that in a catchment
situation? 'Cause I mean, you know,
y- you've got a wide range of people.
How do you, how do you approach that challenge?
So agree with their statement. Um,
how is it addressed? Um, catchment
groups are about taking, you know, the, the working with the willing, taking
people with you. But
what happens is you take the vast majority because of the social way they
work. So
and that is a good outcome. If we get n- 95% of
people on board doing the right thing, then progress is made.
Um, the reality is, and it's not just farming, any,
any, industry, any profession, there's a small percentage who may be a bit
slower for whatever reason, but that's the job of the regulator.
The catchment groups take the-Vast majority move them forward.
And so measuring on a catchment scale is definitely more accurate than at a farm
scale. Um, and so if you empower that community
process, that ev- helps get more people on board and helps...
I mean, that's what, you know, catchment groups are about, tools not
rules. They're about, they come together to get stuff done.
So, I said at the start, we need an environment, a regulatory framework, but if we
empower the community-led catchment group approach, we're gonna get so
much more done.
Yeah. Thanks. That's very, very helpful.
Thank you. Look, I might just jump in with one last question.
Um, you mentioned here that you had concern, that
poorly collaborated limits or market tools risk
sidelining community-led work.
Mm.
What, can you just kind of clarify what you mean there?
Yeah. I-
Maybe give a practical example.
Oh, well, I guess we're not seeing a lot of resource
allocation through commercial mechanisms,
currently, but that would potentially cut across
community-led solutions, 'cause community-led solutions aren't just about,
financial return. And if we went to a market-led approach
for, fully market-led approach for allocating resource, it would go to
the, the highest paying land use. Now, that may not always be
the best environmental outcome. So that's our real concern, that
if, if it, on a... From what we hear, that's not the
intention, but you've gotta be really careful what goes in a plan becomes the plan,
and that's what it is. So, yeah, look, so there is
concern that if a fully market-led approach doesn't actually
consider the environmental outcome, and we need a more holistic,
way to consider our environmental limits and our
allocation rather than simply market-led.
Look, thank you very much, Ben and Stuart. We have met time now.
Uh, we appreciate your time and all the work that you're doing across the country
with the catchment groups, really important work, and a, and a really good
submission, some valuable considerations there.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Right. So we are now moving on to our next submission today,
the Hawke's Bay Regional Planning Committee.
And we can see you there, Tania, and I
think Hinewai, is popping up there as
well. Um,
good morning. Good morning to you both.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us. Um, of course, take your submission as
read, but we'll hand over to you to talk us through the main points, and then
we'll open up for some questions. So over to you.
Kia ora, Catherine. Um, can you hear me okay?
Yes. Yep, we can hear you.
Yeah, fantastic.
Very good.
Well, tena koe te tiamana, Catherine.
Tena koutou, e te committee. So thank you, Chair, and members of the committee
for the opportunity to speak today on this important kaupapa.
So the proposed bills and their practical impacts on the Hawke's Bay
Regional Planning Committee. So in these submissions, we
will refer to the Hawke's Bay Regional Planning Committee as
RPC for short, and Post-Settlement Governance
Entities as PSGEs. Uh, my name is Hinewai Ormsby,
and I appear before you as the co-chair of the Hawke's
Bay RPC, alongside my colleague and co-chair, Tania
Hopmans. I'm currently serving my third term
as a regional councilor, and in the previous term had the privilege
of being the chair of the Hawke's Bay Regional Council.
Uh, Tania helped to negotiate the treaty settlement redress, which
resulted in the establishment of the RPC in
2011. So she has been a member of the
RPC since it was formed 15 years ago.
So this morning, with the committee, we will focus briefly on
a few of the practical issues for the RPC arising from the
bills, leaving time for questions for the members of the committee at the
end.
Um, so just to recap, the RPC is a co-governance body
established under its own legislation.
The RPC at the, is the result of treaty settlements with nine
groups of hapū and iwi throughout Hawke's Bay, and it brings
together the Hawke's Bay Regional Council and the nine PSGEs to make
regional planning decisions together, including the oversight
of regional policy statement and regional
plans. So our submission focuses on
one central point. The bills must
recognize and carry forward the Hawke's Bay
RPC into the new planning system.
So specifically, this means, first, the
RPC must be explicitly recognized
in legislation. Second, the RPC must
retain the same status and equivalent responsibilities as
it has now, and this translates into the RPC having a
decision-making role in developing the regional spatial
plan and the, and the natural environment plan from the
time that the bills are enacted. And the third
is the bills must include treaty-related
obligations at least equivalent to or better than those under the
RMA.
And failure to do these things, will be a direct
and a egregious, a egregious, breach of
treaty, existing treaty settlements with Hawke's Bay
hapū and iwi. It will be a breach of Te Tiriti
and a breach of the principles of the treaty
and inconsistent with the commitments of Clause 10 of
the bills. So put simply, the
machinery for treaty partnership in regional planning already
exists in Hawke's Bay. So the
reform must build on this foundation, not delay or minimize
it.The structure and operation of the
RPC is well understood within the Hawke's Bay Regional
Council, and it will be relatively simple to ensure
the same structure is provided for in the new system by replacing the
role of the RPC in the regional policy statement and regional
planning processes
with the equivalent function in the regional spatial plan
and natural environment plan. So providing this
degree of certainty at this stage in the process will avoid
any future confusion and debate over how the
RPC should operate in the new system or what the effect of
clause 10 in relation to the RPC will be.
Um, so that's, that's my part, and I'll hand over to my colleague, Tania
Hopmans. Thank you.
Atamari akoato. Can you hear me okay?
Ka pai.
Yes.
Um, I'm going... Thank you. I'm gonna talk briefly about spatial
planning in the RPC. So in our written
submissions, we gave detailed reasons for why the RP-
RPC should be responsible for preparing the regional spatial
plan. Uh, but we thought it would also be helpful to provide some
additional context about why the RPC was
established as Treaty Settlement Redress.
Um, in short, all of the treaty claims of the nine hapū and
iwi groups in Hawke's Bay involve significant treaty
breaches by The Crown in relation to natural resources, such as
land, sites of significance, rivers, lakes,
wetlands, the coastal marine area, and flora and
fauna, as well as the impacts of mismanagement by The
Crown, which resulted in sedimentation, flooding, and other
hazards. So one form of redress that was
offered was membership of a committee that developed
regional documents of the highest order.
That is, at that time, they were the regional policy
statement, the regional resource management plan, and the coastal
environment plan.
Participating as decision-makers at a regional level
enabled PSGEs, representing those groups,
to influence the policies and the rules that impacted the natural
resources in the area. Now, the government
proposals include the development of a racial s- a regional
spatial, plan. Uh, regional spatial
plans will be critical for shaping the future of our region
in a takiwā of each hapū and, those iwi
groups. Regional spatial plans will identify where growth
occurs, where infrastructure is built, and how environmental limits are
managed. These are precisely the types of decisions
the RPC already oversees through the de- through the development of the
regional policy statement. Therefore, it's logical for the RPC
structure to form the basis of the spatial planning committee for the Hawke's
Bay region. Amendments could be made to the council
membership to provide for the territorial authorities to be
included alongside the HBRC, the Hawke's Bay Regional
Council, while also maintaining the co-governance model
that already exists with the PSGEs.
In many respects, Hawke's Bay has already been piloting the type of
integrated regional planning this reform seeks to achieve
nationally and has an appropriate governance structure already in place through
the RPC. Adapting this already
operational model will allow Hawke's Bay to transition quickly into
the new planning framework, while importantly ensuring
that treaty settlements are upheld.
I'd like to turn now briefly to transitional risk.
The current drafting of the bills creates potentially significant risks,
not only to the government, but also the council and
PSGEs, due to the proposed timing of the
transition to the new system. Under Clause 9 of the bills, the
couns- The Crown will enter, agreements to uphold
Treaty Settlement Redress within two years of the bills being enacted,
while under Schedule 1, regional spatial plans must be
notified within 15 months. This creates a real
risk that regional spatial plans are developed and notified
before The Crown has reached agreement with PSGEs about how the, how the
RPC is transitioned into the new
system. Strategic planning decisions that shape
land use, infrastructure, and environmental limits for
generations could begin before governance arrangements are
settled, and this is unworkable and unacceptable.
Planning should not run ahead of confirming governance
arrangements.
Um, and so we'd, we'd like to put forward and
re-emphasize our recommendations, and our
submission proposes three practical solutions.
Uh, the first is explicitly recognize the RPC in
legislation. Secondly, to provide the
RPC with an equivalent governance role for the
development of the regional spatial plan and natural environment
plan. And thirdly, that the bills must include
treaty-related obligations at least equivalent to or better
than those in the RMA, especially in Section
6E, 7A, and 8. Uh, so we note that
we haven't elaborated on, on this third,
recommendation in our verbal submissions, because we consider
it well covered by other submitters, including Tina Porour and Ricky
Allison. Um, so in closing, on behalf of
Tania and I as co-chairs of the RPC,
Hawke's Bay has already demonstrated that treaty partnership and regional planning
can work effectively, and it has been.
Uh, councils and iwi across the region recognize the value of collaborative
spatial planning done well. And the Regional Planning Committee
provides a well understood and effective structure where future
planning decis- decisions can be made together, for the long-term
future of our region. Um,
We're happy to take questions now. Thank you, Catherine.
Yeah, Kia ora. Thank you, Hinewai and Tania.
Uh, look, really interesting points, being made, and thank you for
your submission. Um, look, we've got a couple of questions, so we'll go to
Huhana first.
Uh, tēnā koe Hinewaioti, rā Tania.
Yeah.
Uh, e whitu mai ki waenganui a mātou tenei ata.
Um, warm greetings to you both, and thank you for coming with very,
clear recommendations to the committee.
I wanted to invite and just understand, in the
drafting of this legislation, have officials
spent any time with your committee to learn
around the role and function and opportunities to
capture the essence of what you've been doing for many years in this
legislation? Have the officials, engaged with you?
And I've got one further question after
that.
Pania will lead that one. Yeah.
Hi, kia ora. Thank you for your question. Um, yes, that's correct.
We have engaged with officials from Ministry for the
Environment. That has been in particular with
the post-settlement governance entities.
Uh,
we've been engaging for, quite some
time, but obviously we didn't know the detail of
what was proposed until just prior to Christmas.
Okay.
However, we had been anticipating something similar
being, presented through these bills.
So we have worked closely with MFE officials
to work through what could the
RPC look like under the new,
legislation, and hence why our submissions around how the
Regional Planning Committee could be adjusted, to
include territorial authorities and look carefully at the
roles that are coming through in these new bills, like with regional spatial
plans, and how that is an appropriate, work stream for the
Regional Planning Committee. Uh, we've also briefly discussed what
might come through in terms of the combined territorial-- combined
territory board, sorry I forget the exact name, under the
simplifying local government. Um, similar, similar,
solutions could be put forward there.
So we, we cannot see why this cannot be dealt
with promptly prior to the, bills being
enacted.
Yeah, just suppl- supplementing on that-
Yeah, go for a sup-- yeah.
Thank you. Um, because that, that's what I'm thinking about, like
'cause you've provided practical, recommendations for the protection of
what you currently do, but also offerings as to how to strengthen it.
Um, and that's come through quite strongly across iwi, where they're like, "Well,
we've negotiated a treaty settlement.
We've got these provisions here." Maybe it's a schedule in the
legislation that specifies that at least your
roles, and functions are protected or
noted as a special feature of your district.
Would something of that nature, provide a peace of mind both to
the iwi and councils, that you will still be able to carry
out these important functions for your district?
I th- I think those are, um... That is one possible solution.
The Regional Planning Committee has its own specific legislation.
That's another way, that that could be dealt with, through amending that
legislation. 'Cause we're obviously not mentioned in the RMA
currently. The way it was done was through this bespoke piece of
legislation. I think it's important to note though that there are two
fundamental aspects to honoring treaty settlements.
The first is structural for us, which is the RPC is a framework, is a
structure, a governance committee that would need to be continued, but
the second one is substantive, and that goes to the heart
of other people's, submissions as well as our own around
those, Māori interests provisions being retained.
Because the Regional Planning Committee gives effect to the desire
of hapū and iwi to be active
decision makers around resource management, and
unless those provisions are retained in the bills going
forward, there will be no substance around
Māori interests for us to be governors, making
decisions about. So it's twofold, structural and
substantive, which goes beyond just a schedule.
Sorry, just to make that point abundantly clear.
Look, I might just jump in there kind of a s- off that, because you talk
about treaty partnerships working well in Hawke's Bay.
Um, and obviously water is a, is a massive issue-
Mm
... in Hawke's Bay, as we know, with over-allocated
aquifer and obviously, you know, a lot of work going on to look at
water storage projects.
Mm-hmm.
Um, how heavily has the RPC been involved
in, those discussions, in that
work? Um-
Yeah
... and how do you see, the current
legislation, as it is impacting
that?
Yeah. Um, thank you, Chair. That's a great question, and
I think when we look at, the strong relationships and partnerships across
our region, we know that we
have many forums where PSGEs are at the leadership table with
us together as councils and as regional
leaders. And one of those is around water security, which for the
PSGEs is also a priority. So,
their partnership at the table is crucial, and they are there, with the
right PSGEs, particularly w- around water storage, as you
noted, in the Hiritanga Water Storage Scheme.
Um, and the Matariki Governance, Group, which
exists in our, in our region, which brings together
the, the mayors, the, regional council chair, and the
PSGEs and Ngāti Kahungunu iwi. So I think
it's an example of strong relationships across many forums,
including the RPC. Now, I, I think if
we, start to weaken those relationships through
legislation or policy, they might not be as
strong in these other forums where we're collectively trying to achieve
things like water security... housing initiatives, that
PSGs are heavily involved in. And then regional s- it makes
sense that regional spatial planning is a forum that they sit at,
like we do with the current RPC structure.
Um, so I, I f- I guess what I'm
saying here is the PSGs are crucial as
regional leaders at the same table across all
our major projects and regional priorities as well
as... And it makes sense that they're there for regional spatial planning when it
comes to investment in the future of our region.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Hinewai.
Uh, Lan has, another question.
You know, korua, it's basic- you've basically answered it
in terms of clarifying, you know, the
ask, but I just wanna just
be completely sure. So if, for example, there
is an overarching provision
for, say, say equivalent to the RMA, like you
say, same or better, are you saying as long as
the RPC is enabled and you can
u- you can see that the powers are still there, then you don't need
a specific mention in the bills? Or, or are you kind of
feeling like it's of such importance that you do
need specific mention in the act?
Um, if I could, if I can jump in here.
I think
because we already have an enabling statute, the regional, the
Hawke's Bay Regional Planning Committee Act, that is going
to have to be amended to dovetail
with the changes because it refers to the current
re- re- the current Resource Management Act and the plans under that act.
That's changing, so it will have to be amended.
It can either be amended, through an amendment legis-
a piece of am- amendment, legislation to amend
that act, or it could be done as part
of the, two new bills that are coming in which could amend the
RPC Act. Uh, it, it prob- there's probably pros and cons
more for the technicians to consider.
But if we could, have those amendments
worked through where the role of the RPC continues and is
expanded to include the regional spatial plans,
and if those fundamental provisions relating to Māori interests already in the
RMA were rolled over or captured or extended,
whatever, but so long as they were at least maintained, then yes, this could
work.
Thank you. Look, time for one last quick question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, kia ora, morning. Um, look, I just want to confirm, you talk about obviously
RPC's role at a regional level, and then you talked about the role of
iwi hapū as active resource managers, right?
Was it quite... Now, I'm just trying to understand.
So do you, are, is, is that mean you, are, are you involved
at the lower down, at, at the actual level of,
at, at, at applicants appro- are call- calling for re-
applying for resource consent?
Uh, are you involved there if someone's applying to, whether it's access to,
consent to farm or whatever it might be?
Are you involved at that level as well, or just at the planning level?
I just want to understand that, please.
Um, so the Regional Planning Committee currently deals
only with policies and plans.
Yep.
That's what it deals with.
It doesn't deal with consents.
Yeah.
But each of the post-settlement governance entities in their area
may from time to time be involved with particular consents, either
because the developer, the consent applicant, has come
to them, by way of consultation to ask their views ahead of-
Yeah
... filing the consent, which often happens.
Yeah.
And so the PSGs will be involved in that, if that's triggered, or through a
statutory acknowledgement-
Yeah
... if that's triggered. But actually, the Regional
Planning Committee itself is not involved in
day-to-day consents.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tania and Hinewai, for the submission this morning.
Look, a really interesting submission, and some really valid
points that you've made, so thanks for those considerations.
Uh, appreciate your time today.
Thank you.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Kia ora. Both speaking from a very sunny Hawke's Bay.
Right, moving on to our next submission for this morning
is Water New Zealand.
Kia ora. I'm just trying-
Yep
... to turn my camera on.
Yes, we can see you now.
Can you see me now? Great.
Yeah, we can-
Oh.
Oh, no, it's just popped off again.
So we can see Helen, we just cannot see
Jillian. Uh, there we go.
There we go.
We can now, with Water New Zealand behind you.
Welcome both to the select committee this morning.
You've got 20 minutes, so, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission and then open for questions. Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you. I'm joined, as you, as you mentioned, by Helen
Atkins. Helen is a barrister and a former president of Water New
Zealand. Uh, so just initially to introduce Water New
Zealand, we're an industry association representing members from across the
water supply chain, and ultimately our objective is about promoting the sustainable
management of the water environment, with a particular focus on drinking water,
wastewater, and stormwater. Two of our members wa-
Watercare Services and Wellington Water, who between them
supply two and a quarter million people with drinking water
and wastewater in the, in, in, and for, for both
organizations, and stormwater for, for Wellington Water, will speak to the
committee later today. We acknowledge that the committee has been
unable to s- hear from all submitters, and so we really appreciate the
opportunity to speak to the committee today on these two
bills.In terms of Maslow's pyramid of
needs, water is among the most basic biological requirements
for survival. It's essential to life.
Water, like energy, is a lifeline utility or an essential
infrastructure provider, to use the new language in the, in, in the Emergency
Management bill.
The water sector is a complex user of the Resource Management Act.
Water infrastructure is linear. More than 49,000
kilometers of drinking water, 29,000 kilometers of
wastewater, and 19,000 kilometers of stormwater reticulation
assets are across the country. It is also
splice- place specific, with, in relation to the
council provision, more than 350 drinking water plants
and 300 wastewater treatment plants.
Last year, council submitted water service delivery plans to the Department of
Internal Affairs. These signaled the need to invest $48
billion
in water infrastructure over the next 10 years across
growth, levels of service, and renewals.
While the water sector has always been a major user of the RMA,
this investment represents a significant
more than doubling lift on what has come
before. The water sector abstracts from
the environment, but we also discharge into it.
We need the water environment to be safe and to be healthy.
However, there are going to be times when the environmental limits challenge
requirements. We have submitted that the water sector
is broadly submit- supportive of these reforms.
There is a real need for improved integrated spatial
planning. This will help the sector work to
address the water infrastructure deficit which has developed over
several decades, and ultimately allow us to deliver a better
legacy.
Under the water reforms, there will be 41 water service
providers. At my, at my last count,
there will be three single council CCOs who will provide
three waters. There will be four single council
CO-CCOs who will provide two waters, with in-house business
units providing the stormwater services.
There will be nine multi-council CCOs that will provide the three
waters, with 27 shareholding councils.
Three multi-council CCOs providing the two waters, plus in-house
business units providing stormwater with 11 shell- shareholding
councils. And then 23 in-house business uni- units
providing all three waters. Now, I can provide a couple of slides that can
provide that information, 'cause that's a lot to take in.
And ultimately, why am I making the point, and why is it relevant?
It's because all of those 41 water service providers, whether they're
a CCO or an in-house business unit, will need to be able to use
the processes described under these bills efficiently,
effectively. Whether that's as ensuring notices of
requirement, seeking resource consents, or taking part in the development
of national policy direction and in the making of regional and district
plans. The scale of this reform must
not be underestimated. For the water sector,
alongside the water reforms, these bills, there is the Infrastructure Funding and
Finance Amendment Bill, the Public Works Amendment Bill, the Emergency Management
Bill, DIA's proposed move from development contributions to
developer levies, and DIA's simplified local government
proposals. It is vital that there is consistency across the
suite of legislative reforms. The definitions need to be
consistent. The treatment of in-house business units and
CCOs must be consistent. CCOs
must be included in the definition of designating
authorities. In our submission, we have highlighted the
importance of transparency and consultation on the proposed implementation
plan.
Looking ahead, it is vital that the water sector is heard on national policy
direction matters and has a specific role within regional and
district planning, irrespective of whether you're a CCO or an in-house
business unit. Otherwise, there is a risk of a lack of
alignment between the goals of these bills and the water service strategies which
the water service providers must develop.
If this occurs, there is a risk that we do not adequately
protect or safeguard the natural environment and human health,
that the sector does not act- adapt in a timely and cost-effective manner
to the effects of climate change, and that the risks of natural hazards are not
factored into decision-making appropriately, and that the cost of achieving housing
growth and urban development is higher and the required bills
are delayed. In the interest of
providing, some time to ask, answer questions, I'll pause
there. So thank you very much for hearing from us.
Thank you, Gillian, for that submission.
A, a really thorough submission, with lots of interesting points there.
Look, I might jump in with the first question, because I was interested
in the comments that you made in the submission around
market-based allocation, which has come up a little
bit through our submission process.
Uh, you know, some submitters wanting to see that ruled
out, but you've said to proceed with
caution, not ruling it out. I just
wondered, kind of whether you could elaborate a little bit further on your
position there.
Sorry. Good, good morning. Do you want me to answer that question, Gillian?
That's good, Helen. I can always add in.
Yeah. Yeah. So, look, we've been waiting for a very long
time, in this space for an allocation
framework, to be developed. I, we understand
why it's been very difficult, with particular,
focus on, you know, the interests of, Māori rights and,
interests in relation to fresh water.
So w-we, we, we think a, a market-based
allocation process-
Um, is an important thing to develop.
But the reason we say it needs to proceed with caution is it's
been a lot of years before we've even got to this
point. We've been proceeding on the basis under the RMA that
it's a first in, first served approach.
Um, I know that's still, proposed to be an
interim, approach for until such time as a market...
A allocation process is set out. So I just
think, it's not some... We don't know what the detail behind that is.
We obviously would like to be, involved in any consideration of the
detail at the appropriate time. Um, we just need to make sure that
it doesn't have an, an adversant outcome.
Uh, because w-what we don't want,
for water, you know, it's a public, it's a public
resource, you don't want it being traded in the same way
that private resources would be traded, and you don't want it to
end up with a value associated with it that essentially
pushes people who need to be in the market out of the
market. So that's really what, what the,
recommendation, is meaning. It just needs
to be done with care. I'm confident that MFA is fully
aware of, of all of these things. It's, it's looked at these
types of, ideas for a long, long time, so there's a lot of
history behind this, this
matter.
Okay. No, thank you for that
clarification. Uh, look, we'll go to Lann Farm for a
question.
Tina Kurua, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to ask about, environmental
limits. And you say in your
submission, any environmental limit
relating to wastewater or stormwater must implement any
relevant stormwater environmental performance standard and
wastewater environmental performance standard.
So is this just basically asking for
the new set standards that have been put in place, that those are
taken into account
when they're setting the limits?
Yes.
And can you talk us through-
Yes
... what that could look like, given that, for
example, we know, a lot of these,
wastewater, treatment plants, for example,
might be implementing these new standards, but they'll be at
different... You know, some might be implementing them now, some might be
implementing them in a few years.
Is, is there an ability for the councils
when they're setting their plans to just be very conscious of that and taking that
into account? Can you talk us through that?
Yeah. So, so what that refers to is the, the Water Services
Act that, the earlier one actually, the 2021,
2021 one that set up Te Matawai
provides the mechanism whereby we have, drinking water
standards, we have stormwater and wastewater environmental
performance standards. What we're saying is that it's really
important that those standards, some of them are still
to be, you know, finally developed, but that those standards are taken
into account at the regional, it'll be the regional level, 'cause they're
environmental limit related standards, to ensure that there's
no inconsistency between the two.
Um, because, yes, of course, there might need to be some
transitional approaches, and Gillian can talk to you about the fact
that we know that there are a lot of wastewater,
treatment plants around the country that aren't actually meeting
environmental limits that are applied at the moment.
So we've just got to make sure that we keep everything,
consistent because there's no... And it has happened.
There's nothing worse than, a water
organization, and at the moment they're mostly inside
councils, you know, adhering to one set of requirements and then
having a whole different set of requirements imposed upon it,
because it can be incredibly s-expensive.
And remember, at the end of the day, the shareholders of these water
organizations are the people of New Zealand.
You know, they're not, these aren't private sector
organizations, these are public sector
organizations. And ultimately payment for their,
adherence to limits is, comes out of the pocket of, of
the people of New Zealand.
Thank you.
The, the-
Uh, look, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Um, thanks. Um, thanks for your submission.
Just a couple of quick ones. Um, you
emphasize transition overlaps and you're talking
about how there could be three to, three and a half to six years overlap between
the old RMA system and the new one. You, you mentioned you didn't have any
particular tweaks other than just to say your preference is to
have the national policy statements embedded prior. Did you...
Are you able just to speak to your concerns around the transition?
Yeah. So I'll, I'll talk to that and then Gillian might have a couple
of, things that she wants to add.
But essentially, I know that MFA are
currently working on the national direction package.
We know that. Um, Water New Zealand will be seeking to,
to the extent, we're not already involved, will be seeking to be
involved in that piece of work. It's pretty pivotal that
that package is in place before
this, these bills come into a force and
before the planning frameworks that these bills set up, and you've heard from
the, the previous, regional council submiss-submitter
about that, that we've got the, got our ducks in the right row
because the R... One of the reasons the RMA failed, and I'm l- old
enough to be around when it first came into, into
force-Is because it, every, all the
planning got out of sequence, so that was a real
problem, for, s- many councils
trying to get it... We've never got back into sequence, to be quite
honest. Um, and I think it's really important that we
take this pause and reflect moment genuinely,
and pause and reflect, and just make sure that we
put our ducks in the right row. I know MFE is
very conscious of this, and this is their intention, and they've
already spent quite a bit of time on national direction.
So I think my a- advice to the committee would
be, do not rush into, you can
certainly do your report in the time that you've been required to.
You can certainly, you know, do whatever you need to do with
the legislation, but it's about bringing it into force.
Just making sure that the timing is in the right order.
I don't know whether you wanted to add anything, Gillian.
I think I would perhaps just add that, you know, it's good to have
seen the package of national policy statements and the national environmental
standards that were gazetted before Christmas and came into force in
January. I think when I look at the water sector, you know, we fall under the
national policy statement on infrastructure.
I th-
Yeah
... think our view is that that's too generic, and that we would be
looking for a national policy statement that addresses water and, and
clearly e- explains the interlinkages between what's in the
Water Services Act, which the, the, the,
wastewater environmental performance standards and the stormwater environmental
performance standards only apply to councils and CCOs.
They don't apply to private sector, and so that's something that we need to be
able to think about. And is it, is it appropriate that they apply to the private
sector going forward, given that you might have subdivisions when someone
puts in a drinking water or a wa- wastewater treatment plant?
And so I think being able to have an NPS on water would be a
good idea. That's obviously something I don't think this committee can
necessarily, influence, but that's, as we go forward,
is something that as a transition we will be looking, looking
to, encourage.
Thank you. And just quickly also in your submission, and I think we've seen this
from others, did you want the words enable and
protect added? I think it was in reference to the planning
bill. And-
Yes
... and why do you think that's important as, as-
We, we do
... as a strengthening?
We do because, because of the reasons that
Gillian set out at the outset. You know, water is a
fundamental, you know, public good, and it's an
essential element of life, and so we think it's important
to have both of those words in there.
We don't want to steal the thunder of Wellington Water and Watercare,
who you will be speaking from, or hearing from later on in the day,
because they have put, they've put actually some
specific words in their clause-by-clause analysis, and they will
be better placed to answer that question.
So just perhaps re- we, we'll, we'll probably reach out to them and just let them
know that, that that's something that's of interest to you.
But that, that is why. It, it should be...
When you think about energy, and energy does have two
NPSs, bo- the NPSs both
enable, it, transmission and
generation, but in certain cases they also protect
it. So enabling, in essence,
and, and protecting is often comes hand in hand, 'cause you've got to
do both. Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Helen and Gillian for that submission today,
and all of those, considerations and the work that you've put into this
submission. We really appreciate it, so thank you.
Thank you very much for the opportunity.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
So, we now move from water to urban
design, to the Urban Design Forum, who are
joining us, and we can see you popping up
there. Eva and
Graeme.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Look, we have your submission here, take it as read,
but we'll hand it over to you to talk us through the main points and
then we'll open up for questions. So, over to
you.
We can just see you there, Eva, and we have
Jade, Graeme, and Ekin there as well.
We just can't see them. Um,
we... They may just have to accept
first as, um-
Ah, you can now see me and him.
We, I can see you now. There we go. Welcome.
Um, and then we've just got out... the other ones here actually.
I can see you've got a couple more coming online.
Yep, um-
Yes, there's four of us
... Jade. Jade, and then Graeme. Um,
we'll just wait perhaps for Graeme to accept his panelist
prompt.
Yep.
Graeme, if you can hear us,
you need to manually undo the video and unmute on the left
bottom corner.
Uh, Kia ora. I'm here.
Excellent.
There we go. And just pop your video on there too, Graeme, if you
can.
Brilliant. Well, there we go. We can, we can see you all.
Welcome. Uh, look, we'll, we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission and then open up for questions.
Thank you.
Kia ora koutou environment committee. Ko Ekin Sakin toku ingoa.
My name is Ekin. I'm a national committee member of the Urban Design
Forum, the UDF. Um, the UDF is a-
Cross-disciplinary body of professionals who work in and care
for the urban environment. I'm an architect and an urban designer from
Christchurch. I have chaired the UDF's reform working group for
the last five years. Joining me are three of
our working group members, Graeme Scott, an architect and a developer from
Auckland,
Eva Zombori, a planner or urban designer and landscape
architect from Auckland, and Jade McFarlane, a landscape
architect and an urban designer from Christchurch.
Before we start, thank you for this opportunity to speak to you
today. We will keep our speaking to very brief, and
we're really looking forward to your questions.
The subset of our working group that you see today work across the public and
private sectors, and this is also reflective of our broader
membership and the purpose of the UDF, where we seek cross-disciplinary
understanding of urban design as a collaborative process for better
quality in our cities. We have over two hundred members across the
country. I'd like to note today, that we are here to
represent the members' views, as distinct from our personal views
or, or certainly not our clients' or employers'
views. Um, and we
are familiar with our membership's views because since the first reform
announcements in twenty twenty-one, we've been holding
workshops, discussions, and multiple surveys, with our
membership,
because the UDF wants the reform to
succeed. For this submission, as in the previous
one, we have collaborated with other professionals, and
we wish to highlight to you that there is a significant level of shared
concern amongst those of us who are at the coalface,
whether we represent clients or are on the
regul-regulatory side. And this is alongside the
community concerns that we see in our respective cities where there is
anxiety in, for how our cities may become
less livable if we're not
careful. Um, I do have a
presentation which I believe I can
share. Ah.
Uh, am I able to share a presentation?
Yep. Yes, you should be able to. Use the share prompt.
Um, I-- I'm getting a host disabled attendee
screen sharing.
Uh-
That's okay. It's, it's not,
uh-
I'm just conscious of time. Sometimes it takes me some time-
Yeah. I'll-- Yeah, that's okay. We don't need it
... to bring it up. It may be better to just talk, and of course we have your
submission, written submission with us as well.
Yep. I'll, I'll just talk to it.
Um, well, people like living in good places.
Although it may be slightly different for each person, there's general
understanding about what makes a good place.
A good place where, one where people will choose to live pivots around
family, people we care about, s-our society, culture,
economics, and environment. Clearly, the plan-planning alone
can't address all of these, but the urban environment is a huge part of the
overall occasion. We do understand that quantity or
supply is important to the affordability part of the picture, and the
planning bill makes an attempt to address that.
But if we've learned anything from the eighties and nineties mass development and
more recently the MDRS rollout, it's that low
quality, crowded residential development lacking in green space and
privacy, lacking interface with public space or a communal space
just creates a public backlash against increased
density. And we desperately need to get better at doing
density well for our society's long-term productivity and
well-being. In ruling out any consideration of quality in the urban
environment through lack of mention in the purpose and through the excluded
effects, the bill, we think, misses a key element of the success
of cities, the making of a good place.
Because first we shape cities, and then they shape
us. We're concerned that the bill's silence,
on its purpose and goals risks sabotaging downstream effects to make our
towns and cities simply better places.
We made five key points, which I'll just, summarize, and then we'll open
for questions. So firstly, the purpose.
We think the nation's aspirations should be reflected in the purpose of the
bill, and it should be an intergenerational,
statement. Secondly, the goal for a
well-functioning urban environment.
You've heard a lot about this across the hearings.
Um, and we, we do support the goal, but we do,
caution that it is quite different context to urban environments, and it
should be, separated from what well-functioning urban environment
should be separate to well-functioning rural environment.
And it needs to be expanded on as well because in this particular
bill, it will need to do a lot of the heavy lifting.
Three, we welcome, welcome with broad arms the
inclusion of spatial plans, and we submit that they should be further embedded
as a tool for integration across the system and operate at
different scales as well, not just at the highest regional
scale. Four, public spaces. They are what
you think of when you first think of a city.
Public space needs to be acknowledged as the glue in the urban environment.
We're not-- Cities are not just individual lots, bundled
together. We've got public space that connects them.
Uh, and hence its interface, needs to be available to manage and
regulate so that we get the highest return on our public investment,
and it makes a level playing field for business
community. We caution, five, against
removing critical effects from the system.
We don't believe this is necessary in the final architecture of the system
and could be short-sighted with, irreversible
consequences. We need these effects as tools to protect,
manage, use, develop, and enjoy the land for
individual and collective good.Um, we-- they also--
these effects also represent the "so what", when someone goes to breach a
rule in the system. And without them, it would be very difficult to enforce any
national or any other standard. Um, and we heard the minister refer
to, ordinary town planning rules, setbacks, height in relation
to boundary rules, et cetera. We don't believe with the current,
exclusions as drafted you could even impose those
restrictions. And alternatively, we recommend that they are
very carefully redrafted to be extremely targeted so that they achieve
the purpose. We are familiar with the submissions of other institutes,
especially planning, urban designers and landscape architects, and we
consider that we raise similar concerns, perhaps slightly different solutions--
subtly different solutions, but we are in general agreement.
So that you have options as the panel.
And we welcome questions now.
Great. Thank you very much for that submission.
Look, if you can send us through too perhaps your PowerPoint,
just following this, if you just email it through so we've got that as well, that
would be really useful. Um, look, we'll start with Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Thanks for, that helpful submission.
On the, the public spaces, I'm just wondering if you can tell us
how, what, what mechanisms you think could work in the legislation,
if it's a goal or if it's something, something more than
that. And then on those effects and what's considered and what's not
considered, I know you've, said you should be
able to consider amenity and views and things.
Can, can you give us a bit more detail around,
why those are important in your view,
and aren't they just going to... The
argument is for excluding them is obviously that,
you know, planners spend too much time on them, and that creates all
this uncertainty in the system and inefficiency.
So would you be better to focus on bulk and
location where we can understand that there's very obvious,
shading effects and things rather than visual amenity?
Um, yeah. So two questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I will very briefly answer and then, the effects
question, and then I'll hand over to Eva for the public space question.
Um, but even the public ques- space question in the submission we ask for
a goal and, to retain the effects, all effects for
interface of the public space. For the effects, and I am now able
to share, so I will share my screen to
go through the effects very quickly.
Um,
here we go.
I think you can see this now.
There we go. Yes, we can.
Yes, you can. Um,
so the fifth, fifth point is what we are talking about.
It's particularly the four effects.
That's the external layout, visual amenity, views
from private property, and landscape that we are particularly concerned about the
exclusion of, and I'll take you through what they
mean.
External layout of a site as drafted, it would mean that we couldn't even
impose boundary setbacks, because that restricts
the external layout of a site. We're basically taking away a couple
of meters off your site if we're giving, um-- requiring
that. Secondly, the external layout of a site, the site
doesn't seem to have a scale. So at what point a site becomes a
neighborhood because there are just so many minor sites within.
Um, and we have tried deregulation before in terms of a
more efficient system, and these are the sorts of, outcomes that we have
received. Um, visual amenity as
drafted, because it exc-excludes all physical features, it means you can't
consider width, length, height, whether positive or negative.
And so will any size, any length or height fit into our neighborhoods
is our question.
And then excluding external layout, visual amenity, and landscape together
means that we can't regulate the street interface, again,
whether positive or negative. We can exclude
layout, amenity, and landscape, and we get streets-- we might get streets,
and we have some already . Um, or
do we try to make our public spaces safer and more
pleasant? Also at the
interface, this is the public investment part of it, is that when
public invests in an outcome, so the top is the outcome that we are
desiring, the middle is the public investment, and the
bottom is if we have no control at the interface, what we might get
because we will have no control. Views from private property,
again, together-- taken together with amenity and private property views,
that means we can't enforce or, guarantee
privacy and outlook between sites.
For example, these examples, we couldn't, we couldn't
assess or require these to be different.
And how would any home have certainty for outlook and privacy?
Which we don't think is the intention in, in the bill, but as currently
drafted, it would lead to no control on these.
And landscape, again, it can't be, considered
positively or negatively, and, and landscape does make a
difference to our s- public spaces as well as our private
spaces. So these are the five, the
four, and I will-- I can now hand over to Eva,
to answer the public space question.
Right. And I'm sorry, I, I have to ask, start with an apology.
If you could please repeat what was the other question, because I got so drawn
into this part which Akin was talking about.
Yeah. It, it just about mechanisms for public space.
You've, you've said in the submission that a goal,
i-is that enough? Because, I mean, the issues around public space are often
funding related. So if you can talk us through how you
think public space should be, controlled for.
Right. Yes. Yeah, well, definitely that's, m- money is always
an issue with everything especially when it comes to,
public spaces. But as Akin mentioned
earlier, public spaces are largely formed through the interface
between the private.
So that is very important that that interface is handled really
well, just as the previous images, illustrated
that. And,
it is also important because with
higher density a lot of,
activities which traditionally happened in the private sphere
actually shift to the public. So these public spaces
have to serve much more purpose than they used to
before because there ... and there are more users, for all those
functions.
Um, and when we talk about public spaces, it is not
just the squares and the plazas, those probably the ones which,
click in first when one thinks of them, but all the streets and all the roads
are public spaces. So again, if, if we want to
encourage active modes of transport, walking, cycling, they
have to be pleasant environments.
And a lot of it has to be
... has to do with what effects can be
looked at and what are the public
interfacing rules for the individual private
sites. So apart from money, which
is probably a different kettle of fish,
we as open designers can actually do a lot
so that these public spaces can become
quality. I hope it answered your
question.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Look, we'll go to Grant McCallum now for a
Thank you. That, variants, you've, addressed a lot of the issues with
Rachel's questions. Um, but I just wanna ...
I suppose one of the sort of the pushback you get from,
from communities and individual property owners in particular is there
seems to be this fixation about, the view of
the, of a new property from the road around where, where
they place a door, the, the, the s- the size of windows, all that sort of
stuff. How ... And do you see ... H- how do you get that balance
right in your view and so that we don't wind up with, with these,
unintended consequences from that point of view?
Where do you use?
I, I will, address this in, in context of the
effects that, uh-
Yeah
... try to be put outside of,
the system. Well, the, the, the key thing to
understand is the interface to the public space.
So, I don't think it's most of the time, certainly in
my work or l- life that, that people
are not interested in what other people are doing until and
unless it starts to affect a shared space-
Mm-hmm
... or their own space. So it's a boundary and an interface
issue more than a my opinion on some- whatever someone
else is doing issue. So that's why the interface needs to be
managed. And for example, doors and windows to the street
do have a function
.
Yeah.
Um, and it's not about how they look.
Their function is that there's coming and going, there's someone there.
It's not, we're not living behind fences, and our streets
are where we put in a lot of public money into, don't simply
have, continuous fences and no
interaction or nothing pleasant that we share with each other at that
interface.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we'll now move to Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, really interesting submission, so thanks for
that. I particularly like your definition of,
well functioning urban environments and the aspects that sit underneath
that. Um, I have a question around
accessibility. So you've mentioned, I think under sense of
belonging, the need for communities to be able to
access various spaces, and I wondered
whether you see a role for,
explicit goals around,
accessibility for disabled people in legislation like
this, whether you would include it-
Mm
... perhaps in your goal. I see you've got inclusion in there, whether
that you would expand that to include accessibility as well.
Um, if so, what would you change to give effect to that?
And if not, why wouldn't you include it?
I will hand over to Jade to answer the well functioning related, question.
And Jade, if you want me to open the slides, I can do
that.
Yeah. Hey, and thanks for your, question.
Um, yeah, I basically feel like, you know, accessibility is a, a huge part
of, of a functioning human environment.
Um, there has to be safe movement as well.
Um, so we don't, we don't wanna create, you know,
areas where crime or antisocial behavior could happen.
So I, I do think, the goals would be a really good place
for something like that. Um, I do think, as well as that
we need to kinda understand a bit more about how the system's gonna function with
the spatial plans,
because it, it does come down to the scale of what those plans
will be showing. So obviously there's, you know, the regional scale.
Um, we already have a lot of those plans out there, moving through the
scales into your neighborhood. So at that finer grain
level of detail, we would be really
interested to know what, you know, the government's proposing
with, that granularity, I guess, and how
much that could be brought into the spatial plans.
So I definitely think that's a, a place, where we can have those,
I guess, guides or controls around what that looks like
Um, you know, for example, some of our most successful, in
Australasia, areas for accessibility, likes of,
some of Melbourne's walkable blocks, they're between 80 and 100
meters. So if we're thinking about being equitable, I think, so that was part of
your question was, you know, people that maybe don't
have, um ... They might be very young or
elderly with disabilities. Um, some of the larger suburban
blocks currently in New Zealand under, our planning regulations
don't work for those people, so they have to either hop in a car and rely on that
kind of private transport, or, you know, they
just stay home. So that's not a good outcome, so that's part of what I want to
see, come through with the spatial planning legislation.
Hopefully that answers your question.
Thank you. Just a quick sup on the back of that because one of your requests is to
amend Section 11C to say, "Well-functioning
urban environments". At the moment it reads, "To create well-functioning
urban and rural areas". W- w- why does that need to change
when it says that already? Or is it just-
So-
... the word environment that you-
Well-
... kind of needs-
So, so-
... needs clarification?
So the word environment was, is quite well known now, so through the
NPSUD, well-functioning urban environment is something that is, I guess,
it's a language that we know. Um, that's been changed to area.
I'm not sure why, for the background for that change.
Um, so yeah, I guess it's more of a
it's probably a question for, for, for you is, you know, why did that
change to area? Um, and also, obviously did,
did it have something to do with the rural being brought into that?
Um, so, so yeah, we're a bit unsure about that
change.
But how does that actually-
I'd also like to just-
... impact practically, I suppose, is what I'm asking.
Like, is that gonna practically impact anything, or is it more just a word
change?
Um, so area for me is, is more, a little bit more basic,
so it's more of just location based word, whereas environment really deals with
public infrastructure, built form, you know,
interfaces. That's a whole sort of
environment as, as, as I understand it, whereas area is more just location
based. Um, but you can jump in if you've got a different view.
I'll, I'll jump i- not so different to just adding the area
usually implies we're looking at it from a very high bird's-eye view, and it's
a, it's a, two-dimensional thing about
boundaries, whereas environment is a three-dimensional,
full consideration. So it's a much more integrated consideration if we say
environment instead of area.
Okay, cool. Look, thank you very much. Look, we have gone over time.
We appreciate your time today, and your very
interesting submission, you know, covering, urban design and,
all the challenges there. So we appreciate it.
Uh, thank you very much.
Many thanks.
Thank you.
Uh, now moving on to our next submission today is the
Insurance Council New
Zealand.
And actually it is Para Nehe ki
Waitotara. And we can see you there,
Sarah.
Uh, just if you want to, accept the prompt to come
through as a
panelist.
Well,
tēnā koutou.
There we go. Sarah, yes, we can see you-
Tēnā koutou katoa
... and hear you. Welcome to the Select Committee.
Thank you.
Uh, you've got 20 minutes with us, so, we'll hand it over to you to
talk us through your submission.
Um, just to let you know, yeah, can the prompt be sent to Richard
Bottomore? Sorry. I'm just here listening in, with Para
Nehe ki Waitotara, but they should be here as well.
Okay, so you're waiting on someone else to come through? Okay.
Um,
we'll just-
Oh, they've just logged on now.
There we go.
Oh, there we go. We can see you both.
Welcome to the Select Committee.
Ka pai. O kati ake. Tēnā koe, Catherine. Otirā ki tatou.
Yes.
Uh, kua ui mai nei i te rangi nei. Uh, e mihi ana
ki a koe e te tuakana e, e, e Rawiri. E
mihi, mai oha ki a koe, i roto i tēnei
kaupapa mō tātou. Uh, nō reira tēnā hoki tātou
katoa. Uh, Catherine, kia ora.
Welcome, this morning. And apologies, we just,
yeah, so to our whanaunga, Sarah, who's part of
our, our technical team around matters of this
nature. Uh, my name's, Mr Asia Ross.
I'm the Chief Executive, here at Para Nehe ki Waitotara, and to
the
right of me is, Richard Bottomore, who
has oversight of, our whenua, that
we're custodians of, here in Taranaki.
So tēnā koe.
Um, so are, are you comfortable that perhaps we just proceed with,
talking to our submission,
and then we can-
Yes. Look, it's, we've got your submission-
I can-
... so do take it as read, and if you just wanna talk us through the main
points, and then we'll open up for questions.
Ka pai. All right. Well, perhaps what we'll do is we'll just give ...
I- I'll, I'll, I can hand over to Richard and then he can talk
specifically to the three, the, the three ...
Well, but, p- but perhaps before we do
that we'll just give you some context, I, I guess, in terms of our organization
and, and who we represent. Um-Uh,
we, for, for
context, we're custodians of, 20,000
hectares of whenua tupuna,
that has, that
essentially was as a consequence of, the,
the, the confiscations of land here in
the, 1860s,
right, right through to the 1880s and then certainly into the
1900s when land was, was,
traded by the, the then government and the Crown to th- to
now us essentially, holding the 20,000
hectares on, on behalf of 11,000 owners here in Taranaki.
So I guess, from that perspective, we're the
largest privately-- private, private owners of whenua here in
Taranaki. Uh, however, it is tied up in the perpetual lease
scheme, which is, still an outstanding matter,
that we'll deal with, in, in due course.
Um, so that just gives you a bit about who we are.
Uh, just in terms of, the bill,
in, in principle, it's, it's a bill that we can't support.
Uh, and, and it's not, it's not that we're not up for development
and the, the, that particularly development to our
tupuna whenua as it relates to the aspirations of our owners.
Uh, but the, the, the, I guess
the bill in its current form, essentially rolls back
substandard protections and reduces, Māori
involvement to procedural consultation in these matters.
So, and in our opinion, you know,
as it's drafted, materially weakens, I guess, Māori
rights, and interests in whenua.
Uh, but-- and, and, and our natural taiao.
Uh, but furthermore to that is, is the environmental
protections as it relates to that and the responsibilities, I
guess, that fundamentally, are in place between the Crown and,
and Māori iwi. Um, and that's sort of the
basis in which, we arrive at our decision.
The, the technical aspects, that we'll, we'll talk to in terms of
key issues a-around that, I'll, I'll hand on,
to Richard Baldrimore to sort of provide some more technical detail around
that.
Oh, tēnā koutou. Me hana ki a koutou te-- te rangi nei.
Um, āe, mihi atu te, te, te Rawiri.
Uh, āe, pai ki te tūtaki ki a koe, i tēne ata.
Uh, kia ora koutou. Um,
thank you, Aisha. Um, I guess Aisha kind of summed it up to our point that
we are, we are supportive of development, but it's how that
development, proceeds and goes about.
And I'll just speak to the couple of aspects.
You have read our submission, but one of the real main ones comes around the
proposal for RMA Part 2 and that replacement with the
goals. So for us, as Aisha said, that, that
will weaken their, that engagement with Māori and take it
more to just
a point where it's consultative, and doesn't un- undertake the
worldview and the connection to that whenua.
Um, the goals and frame will, will inappropriately place
development, enabling outcomes on an equal weighting with the, with the taiao
and the environment. And for us, it's about that, ensuring that that
land, we, we farm in our instance, but development is sustainable for those
future generations. So ensuring that we're leaving that whenua in a place for our
mokopuna to come, and that we're not s- extracting too much
today, as a consequence.
Uh, so yes, the concerns, given the enabling development nature of the bill,
any environment protections, enhancements, improvements will be seen, as
a constraint potentially rather than driver in the absence of a hierarchy.
So not having a hierarchy there, not explicitly saying where the taiao sits in that
hierarchy and, and above, or in conjunction to economic development,
in our view is a concern and can lead to, to poor outcomes, particularly for future
generations. So we must ensure, in our view, that the taiao
is, is prioritized, today. The other piece was
around the, the natural direction-- national direction,
sorry, and that over, overcentralization, through
the, through the national direction, and how that will
again marginalize Māori input, going forward, which
we see as a real key risk. And it, it shifts-- also shifting the power
away from the regions and that local knowledge, that we have in
there. The regular retaking bills, I won't talk about too much about
that, but I guess from our perspective and how we farm and how we engage with our
whānau, hapū, and marae on the grounds, you know, we embrace those, the SEZMs, as
we call here, or the, the taonga sites or wāhi
tapu. Um, and, you know, our, our viewpoint is not looking at
those as a hindrance from the whenua, but actually how we work with that.
So we have, wāhi tapu management plans that we have across all
our, our, our wāhi tapu on our actively managed whenua, and we're working,
with our lessees association on the, on the ones that are still under a
leasehold regime. Essentially, that looks at what those sites are and how we manage
that. So it's not about a construct and about not being able to use it, it's how we
use it and ensure the protection of those sites, for future
generations. And that extends to our ECNA and those other aspects that have been
raised through o-other submissions, for that
piece. Freshwater plans and resource consenting.
Uh, we support freshwater plans. We have our, our freshwater plans over our,
farms at this point in time. So we definitely support that,
but we don't see that as the only tool.
So using that as a single mechanism and removing consenting aspects we can see can
be a concern there as well, and how that goes forward.
So again, as a tool, we, we endorse it, but actually it shouldn't be the only
tool that we work with.
So from our point of view, the plan making, we must move from that consultation
piece to that co-design.Uh, we must ensure that we keep that Māori voice
in it, to ensure those, those good outcomes that we've achieved.
And we've got some really good, good news stories here in Taranaki.
Um, one through the recent district plan, from New Plymouth District
Council, and another of a plan change down at South Taranaki District Council as
well. So i- in our world, that's the, uh...
when done right, the RMA can be an effective tool.
It's probably that it's only just coming in these last couple of, district plan
reviews and, amendments where we actually see that plan in full
action and see that collaboration, with Taranaki Māori and, and other Māori
entities and PSGs come to the forefront in ensuring that, that
future development is good development moving
forward. Ka
pai.
All right, team.
So just backing that up, in our view, our submission sets out the
recommendations, which is that res-restoration or including of a Part 2
equivalent in the RMA, a-and ensuring that sits there, whether it's in
a goals framework or something else, ensuring we keep that there.
But looking at that, ensuring we still continuing, like we've seen here in
Taranaki, with some of that co-designing and shared decision-making as we go
through that process to ensure we get the best outcomes.
The other one is around that, that priorit- prioritisation of the, of te taiao
and the environment, making sure that still sits there. We have a hierarchy there.
The detriment to a taiao is not,
you know, it's not
lessened, I guess, as a result of d- a-a-as a result of development, and we ensure
that we have those, those, that sustainable practice moving forward, those future
generations. And for us, it's around that regulatory take and actually
mo- working with what we have, typically our SAS on that, Wahi Tapu,
Tapu we've talked about. Um, some of those other aspects, ECNI, and how we work
with that, ensuring that we do preserve those sites for future generations and work
within the constraints of that to ensure that it's sus-su- sustainable land
use. Ka pai. Thank you
Chair.
Yeah, uh-
Catherine out front.
Thank you. Thank you, Richard.
Um, on, on that note, Catherine, t-
just, and given the, the balance that the paper's read as well, we're, we're happy
to take any pātai from, you and your committee.
Brilliant. Hey, thank you very much for your submission, and your
thoughts there and considerations.
Look, we've got a question from Lann Farm, so we'll go to
Lann.
Oh, tena koutou to you and the team. Thanks so much for your submission.
Um, Chair, I've actually got two questions, if we have time.
Okay. Yeah.
Um, so the first was just about picking up on your
comments in, in your submission about not wanting
any,
additional degradation of te taiao.
And we're noting, and, and a lot of submitters have picked up, there's
essentially a lot of gaps potentially in this new
system where
things could get worse, especially when, the
environment is already under strain.
One thing that's been brought up, commonly
is this idea that you could have, say,
an overarching
maintain or improve clause that might kind of fill those gaps where it
sort of holds the line on environmental degradation.
Would you support that kind of,
protection, I guess?
Uh, if, if it was, the direction that this
took, our view would be to enhance as opposed to necessarily
maintain, because maintain is, well, you d-
you... Yeah, it's, it's probably more retractive
than, sort of, yeah, more,
generationally or intergenerationally, focused.
So, from a values pers- and principles perspective, we're taking
a multi-generational approach to the way in which, for
instance, we develop whenua. Uh, and that would be the, that would be the
view, going into that specific question, if that
was, if that was to be.
Kia ora. Thank you. And that might have been my, glitch.
It was maintain or improve.
Yeah, improve or enhance would be the, the-
Improve or enhance
... would be the principle that we- we'd support as opposed to necessarily
maintain because-
Okay
... main- yeah, maintain, w- we, we
think the status quo is, is, and maintaining status quo is
probably not, not ideal.
Thank you. No, that's really clear.
Um, and then my second question was around, you
mentioned, you talked about freshwater farm plans.
But in your submission, you talked about your concern about this
more permissive framework and the ability for councils
to put more in the permitted
activity area where they won't be getting consents and
whatnot. Um, and you talk about concerns about
this, particularly when it comes to hapū and iwi
engagement. Can you talk us through what your concerns are with
that?
Uh, ka pai. And as mentioned, we, we have, our freshwater farm
plans in place, now. And so for us, it's around that.
It is a great tool, but to your point, we need some regulatory
oversight, in my view, and Peter's view, 'cause left to their own devices,
most... You know, vast majority of our farmers are good farmers, so I'm not, we're
not, don't wanna go there, but we just need to ensure that we have those guidelines
in place and we have those measures in place to ensure that, to Aisha's point, that
we are actually enhancing going forward, looking at that
future, those future generations, and that's our
focus. So, you know, in Taranaki, you know, with our riparian
planting, you know, that's been in, in the system now with TAC for many, many
years, and we're starting to see the fruits of that, particularly with that
biodiversity
aspect and, and the health
Look, I just wanted to ask you about point 14 in your
submission, if you could put some context around it, where you've said
feder- federated farmers have intimated that some
farmers have large areas of their farms confiscated in the form of
significant natural areas, outstanding natural landscapes and
sites and areas of significance to Maori.
And then you go on to talk about Taranaki Maori, and the
experiences that they are, you know,
experiencing at the moment with the confiscation and plundering of
whenua, you've written here. And unfortunately much of this confiscated
and plundered whenua is held by many, including farmers,
who do not appreciate the intrinsic and whakapapa value of the whenua.
That's what point 14 says. I just wondered whether you could put some
context around that as to what you mean there and, and
why that's in your submission.
Uh, well, I guess the historic context, to the latter point in that, in
that paragraph is really in the context of the perpetual leases that
is, that are still held within third party,
you know, settler, settler family, holdings.
Uh, that, our past experience since
establishment in 1976 would be that there's been very
little regard, to things of historical
value, wahi tapu, resource use on whenua, and we
still hear stories today from local, from Taranaki Maori or,
or PKW shareholders for that matter that, that, really refer
to real poor management of the, of their, their ancestral lands
that are still bound up in perpetual leases.
So that's the, that, that's, what that i- is in reference
to. Uh-
In regards to the current context, that first piece in there, Catherine, so
that's around, we talk about the regulatory, regulatory taking place with the
SR, with the SEZMs. Uh, uh wahi tapu sites and it co- I guess in
Taranaki for the, recent just, new provincial council ship
plan. We've seen a lot of that with those, SNOs, those significant natural
areas have been identified and outstanding natural landscape to be put into that
overlay. There's concern around the future land use of that
whenua, and their property rights, I guess if we put it in that
context. Uh, we have a different viewpoint on that, and that's probably
following that different viewpoint that actually wahi tapu our, our sites of
significance, they are a part of that cultural landscape.
They shouldn't, they should be viewed as any other archeological sites are viewed.
Uh, they should be maintained and protected, and that's around land use.
So for us, it's around how we manage those sites on our farm.
So it's not saying you can't graze them, it's those practices of grazing.
It's those practices of doing earth works, you know, we avoid in those spaces, we
don't graze and certain, implement, implement weather when it's, to
avoid pugging. So it's around how we farm and that, those pieces of whenua and
how we respect those sites, ensure they're still maintained.
In regard to SNOs, that's around that biodiversity and then enhancements and
ensuring that those regenerative forests are still maintained and are
there for future generations and enhanced and grown, ideally.
Okay. No, thank you. Yeah, and I, I appreciate that's come up within the regulatory
relief area, that you speak about.
Uh, I just was interested in the clarification on that.
No problem.
So thank you. Uh, look, we've got a question from Cameron Luxton.
Thank you, Chair. Um, thanks. I've got a...
When it comes to identifying these, wahi tapu and wahi
tupuna,
I've heard, in conversations that, you know, there's a lot of areas that
don't necessarily want to be identified on a map and displayed.
Have you got, or have you thought at all about
ways that that could be, dealt with in a way that, you know, they can still,
that sites can still be identified without being
advertised, broadly so that,
yeah, things can still work through?
Ka pai. Um, tena koutou Cameron, appreciate that, that, pātai.
Yes, in short, yes, on the whenua that we actively manage in our
third party lessees, that we're working with on some of those wahi tapu
sites. Uh, they're not, some of them are not listed sites.
They don't sit in the NGTA or they don't sit in the district plans.
Um, so for us it's about how we manage that internally.
So we work with hapū on the ground a- and the, the iwi, and we also work
with an archeologist as well to help identify and look at those sites and put our
own management plan over them, over those sites, and that's an agreement between
us, and in this case some of our lessees as well, on how we look after those
sites. Um, to your point, there are sites, particularly up on that, that
there is sensitivities around having those public
and in the public forum.
Mm. Yeah, and I think just, just if I may add there, Cameron,
just further would be beyond our own land
holdings, I guess this is why we have a
view around ensuring that,
hapū and iwi particularly, we've, we've, we've said
Maori, and Maori rights as it re- relates to,
co-design and consultation will, will bring forward
the solutions in this respect, with, with,
other, other, I guess landowners i- in terms
of the ancestral, wahi tapu pieces, tupuna
pieces, that relate to specific blocks of land here in
Taranaki.
Yeah. If I may, Chair, I just, I think, yeah, I appreciate that-
Just one last quick question there, Cameron.
Oh, okay. Sorry, I don't wanna use up all the time here.
Uh, but the, yeah, I just, you know, in these perpetual lease, arrangements,
yeah, it's clear being the landowner, you know, you can come to an arrangement
with the perpetual lease and the, the murkiness that is that
situation. I was, my question was more about how we identify in the
future, sites that are, that are, you know,
future, discoveries perhaps, or future identifications that aren't already
listed on, on third party land. Um, that was just
whether there'd been any thoughts about that.
But
yeah, if you-
Yeah
... if, yeah, if you did have anything in a future discussion, it would be
appreciated to send to the committee.
Excellent. Uh, yeah. Uh, thank you.
Yeah, there's probably more learned people at, at a hapū and iwi level that would,
be able to provide more substance than, than, than ourselves at this
point.
Okay. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today. We've met time.
Um, thanks for all of that feedback, and those considerations.
Appreciate your time.
Excellent. Tena koutou.
Kia ora.
Take your night.
So we now welcome our next submitter through, who is New
Zealand Sport Fishing Council. And there we
go. We can see you, Rowan. Welcome to the Select Committee this
morning. You've got 20 minutes with us.
Are you expecting anyone else, or you are...
Good morning, Chair. Um, yes, I am. Mr.
Seeling is gonna be online, with me.
Okay.
Just check that he is-
We'll just wait for him to perhaps-
He is here
... come through before we get started.
Um. There we go.
Um, he says he has not been invited to the panelist, but now, okay.
Now he just needs to accept that prompt, and we should have him
with us shortly.
Um,
there we go. Welcome, welcome to the Select Committee this
morning. Uh, now, you have 20 minutes with us.
Uh, take your submission as read, and we'll hand it over to you to
talk us through the main points, and then we'll open up for some
discussions.
Great. Well, thank you very much. Um, I'm the legal
counsel for the New Zealand Sport Fishing Council.
My legal practice is principally under the RMA, but I also
do some work in the Fisheries Act space.
Uh, the New Zealand Sport Fishing Council, just a little bit about
that. Uh, it represents fifty-five
affiliated member clubs with thirty-th- seven thousand affiliated
members and supports the six hundred thousand or so New
Zealanders, who fish. So with me is
Dirk Seeling, who I've mentioned.
He's a member of the stakeholder working group for Sea Change, or
was, and also the Ministerial Advisory Committee on
Implementation of Sea Change. He's a member of the Mercury Bay
Game Fishing Club, or board member of the Governance Committee of
Legacy and a former board member of,
NZSFC. Now, our submission is on
a single issue, whether these bills
should regulate fishing in an overlap with the
jurisdiction of the Fisheries Act of 1996.
We say that it shouldn't, and that a bright line should be
drawn, between this resource legislation
and the Fisheries Act, so that all ecological effects of
fishing on the marine ecosystem are addressed under the Fisheries
Act. And the reason that we say that is that the
Fisheries Act is purpose-built for that task.
Um, it has an extensive and appropriate range of
tools, to comprehensively ensure that fishing is
undertaken sustainably.
Now, it hasn't always been applied correctly,
and there are a range of examples of that which we discuss
in the submission, and Mr. Seeling is also gonna speak to that
today. And we say that's why people have turned to the
RMA and now this legislation, to plug the
gap. Um, but we don't want band-aid
solutions to the problems in our marine
environment. Uh, the council wants the Fisheries Act to be
applied fully and properly in accordance with its purpose and principles.
So I'll just turn over to Dirk now to talk about his practical experience,
w-working with the minister on these issues.
Then I'll summarize a few more key points from the submission, and we can move to
questions.
Um, yes, thank you, Rowan. Um, I just want to
mention that, in these various forums I've been in, I
observed a clear bias in favor of commercial interest
by Fisheries New Zealand officials.
Um, my experience in the Sea Change
process, officials from MPI
and DOC
had their own viewpoints, which were not accepted by the stakeholder working
group, yet they still drove through in
subsequent processes. For instance, bottom
trawling. The Sea Change stakeholder working
group
had a
consensus-based
decision-making process of commercial fishing, and the
SWG agreed that bottom trawling was to be
phased out in its entirety. Fisheries New
Zealand afterwards promoted trawl corridors,
and eventually no action was taken at all.
Fisheries New Zealand also proposed that scallop dredging should
be banned for recreational, but not for commercial
fishers. An emergency closure was the end
result of continued dredging.
My experience with MAC.
MPI and DOC officials have put together the Ministerial
Advisory Committee and had included two representatives
for commercial fishing
and none for recreational fishers. The minister, Mr.
Nash, was challenged in a public forum over
this, and as a result, I was belatedly included
as a recreational representative when the process was
already well underway. The stringent
confidentiality agreement that I had to sign
before being included in the MAC prevents me from including
more examples of bias.
And why
do you think I am telling you this?
Because the RMA was subsequently, subsequently seen as
a bottom-of-the-cliff mechanism to rescue our
marine biodiversity.Fisheries New
Zealand has reacted to this by seeking a
requirement for sign-off by the chief executive
of Fisheries New Zealand in the proposed legislation
currently before you, and so undermining
any potential effectiveness. You
may well ask yourself why the New Zealand Sports Fishing
Council
does not want this ambulance at the bottom of the
cliff. As an organization, we feel strongly that if the
Fisheries Act was properly and truthfully applied as
intended, whilst maintaining public
input, which by the way, Fisheries New Zealand officials
have tried to remove on several occasions, then the
end result would be the restoration and maintenance of our
marine biodiversity. You are
all politicians and familiar with what the
public wants and how to achieve their wishes through
legislation. The real issue here is the Fisheries Act
and in particular, the imple- implementation of it by the
ministry. That's where you should affect change, not
via the RMA.
If, however, you decide to maintain the RMA
overlap in fisheries management with the Fisheries
Act, then the required sign-off by the chief
executive of Fisheries New Zealand is an
unacceptable travesty. Thank
you.
Thanks, Dirk. So just a few other key points from the
submission. We set out the background to this overlapping jurisdiction on
the Matiki decision, which I'm sure the committee will be familiar with.
Um, the, the factual backdrop to that was
Canterbury's, and that as a result of overfishing, which in
itself shows a failure in the implementation of the Fisheries Act, that the
problem in practice of implementing that decision is that it hasn't
given a clear jurisdictional line.
So every time someone tries to do something under the RMA, you have
this, complex debate about whether or not it's within
jurisdiction, plus arguing about the merits of the proposed
control, and that creates great inefficiency.
Um, in, in comparison, well, the, the
other issue that we're seeing with implementation of the RMA in
practice is that it's a blunt tool.
You get prohibited activity rules and plans, and that's about all you can
get. Um, in comparison, the Fisheries Act has a whole
suite of, tailor-made,
regulatory options in terms of caps limits,
method restrictions, seasons, spatial controls,
temporal measures, and size limits.
So it's just much more,
can get a much more tailor-made solutions under the Fisheries Act.
Um, we've noted in the submission some recent court
decisions, about the Crayfish 1
fishery, which have
really, are a
significant change in the way the Fisheries Act should be applied.
It's been applied as an overall judgment balancing approach,
up until recently, and the High Court has said, no, there
are environmental bottom lines, and that which need to be
applied. And then if you're meeting those environmental bottom lines, then you
consider utilization above that.
And, and so we want the Fisheries Act,
applied in accordance with those decisions.
Um, the other practical example which we
respect to in the submission is that of bottom trawling.
Um, so there's been a whole process with the Sea Change
plan, and then the processes Dirk was involved in with respect to
implementation of that plan. And, and
then the recommendation to, to exclude bottom
trawling entirely has been watered down to trawl corridors and now no
action. The result of that has been that under the
proposed Waikato Regional Coastal Plan,
submitters have sought restrictions on bottom trawling, and they've actually
succeeded. And so now we're going to the Environment Court,
with the fishing industry appealing that to have,
a very complicated and expensive argument, about that
issue. It would have been much more straightforward and to the point had
a regulation been promoted under the Fisheries Act.
Um, the, the relief-- Oh,
sorry. There's three other reasons that I would like to, to note,
in support of the relief that haven't been set out in the submission and then
turn to questions. Um, there's an efficiency point
here. Uh, under the planning bill, you're excluding
from the definition of effect, anything which is
regulated under another, another statute.
But that's not the approach in the Natural Environment bill.
There may be good reasons to not do that in the definition of effect, but this,
this is an example we can create efficiency by not duplicating
regulation. Another reason is that we already have a Marine
Reserves Act, and we've shown that we can do,
bespoke marine protection in the form of the Tikapa Moana Marine
Protection Act. And then the final point, is just we're concerned
about the institutional, capacity
of regional councils or whoever ultimately implements this
legislation to, to grapple with fisheries issues amongst the
myriad other, things that they're going to need to do.
So I think I'll leave it there to leave some time for questions.
Look, thanks so much, Rowan and Dirk, for those insights.
Look, we do have a couple of questions.
We'll go first to Grant McCallum.
G'day, g'day. Um, this is a very, always a, a
very, interesting area. I suppose the, the, the key
question it comes back to, and Dirk, you kind of highlighted it, if the
Fisheries Act's got all the tools, how do we actually get it to
be effective?Because
y- you can see the fr- what led to the Matiti decision was the fact that obviously
people weren't getting satisfaction under the Fisheries Act.
Yeah, so basically what you're raising is a, is a, it's a political
issue. It is getting the minister to look at
his, the advice from his officials and see if it is
unbiased. If he can see it's biased, he should take
action accordingly, and I think we have a long history now
of, of very biased advice,
from what was MPI and official New Zealand officials.
So, you know, the, the Fisheries Act itself probably doesn't
require much in the way of amendments.
It just needs to be implemented properly,
and I've got no other answers. Rowan may have some other ideas, but
it's really, it's a political issue.
Uh, I, I agree, Dirk, but I would add it is, it is also a legal
issue in the sense that, you know, Fisheries New Zealand
needs to be directed to apply that environmental bottom line approach and
to, adopt a precautionary approach and an ecosystem
approach. And, you know, if they, if they do
that, then the decisions which are coming out should be much better
we say.
Yeah, and, and just, actually just, one final, another quick question if I may.
The, the, the, the one of the
complexities here is obviously if you start looking at the impacts of if,
if you ban bottom trawling, what impact would that then turn around and have
on the, on the treaty settlement, the Sealord deal, because that seems to be
an overarching discussion that sits with this.
Not something which is amenable to a quick answer, but, um-
Uh, look, look, I, I think that's something that, that,
specific legal advice, for, for Crown Law is gonna be needed on.
Yes, the point that I'd make is that that, that deal does not talk about particular
methods. It talks about a share in the fishery.
Yeah.
And it's not a proposal at all to ban commercial fishing.
We're not against commercial fishing.
Um, but it's just the methods which are being employed, we need to get
smarter with those methods and, and we say there are
alternatives, so therefore the, you know, at a high level the
settlement's not affected because the quota is retained.
It can still be fished, just not with a destructive method.
Yeah. Th- thank you. Um, thank you, Chair.
Thank you. And now we'll go to Cameron Luxton.
Uh, thank you, Chair. Um, yes, Ron and Dirk, your, your questions to
Grant sort of, deal with the first part of my question, but, the second
part, like the Matiti decision was like blunt and constrained to one
location instead of looking at the wider fisheries
area is, and this, this has clearly become a
band-aid, in this environmental legislation because as you say, you know,
the purpose of the Fisheries Act might not be, being achieved.
But
if, if we were to, what, what could this, this committee do while looking at
environmental legislation that would actually make that
clearer? Now, we're not looking at the Fisheries Act in this select committee right
now, but is there something that you think that this committee could
undertake, to do that? And just, just to follow, like I've, I've
got a sup as well, but I'll just throw it in there, which is when we talk about
fisheries, could you just be clearer about is it marine
environment or fisheries? Because the Matiti
decision, had a lot to do with, you know,
the anchoring of the reef and all of that sort of stuff.
So just to be clear, would that be covered in the f- in the fisheries leg?
Thanks.
Uh, so the, a- addressing the second part first,
the, when, when, if, if there were an environmental
reason to regulate activities that are, that disturb the
seabed, not fishing, so anchoring generally or, or a- anything else,
then that properly sits within this resource legislation that you're
considering because it's not regis- it's not leg- it's not regulated
under the Fisheries Act. Um, so, so
that's, that's that aspect. Um, but then in terms of the,
the Fisheries Act itself, it does consider the broader effects of
fishing on the marine ecosystem, so, you know, which is those, these
indirect, indirect effects that a lot of these,
the specific incidences we're considering concern.
Um, we are conscious that this committee doesn't have a remit to,
deal with the Fisheries Act and make recommendations on it.
Uh, what, but what we do ask of you is that you
recommend to exclude fisheries from this
legislation on the basis that all adverse
effects of fishing on the marine environment are dealt with
under the Fisheries Act. That, in a political sense,
puts the onus onto the people responsible for that
legislation to do their job properly.
And if I can just quickly add to that, because
we, we realize the remit of this select committee is very limited in that
regard, but
we also look at it, you have wider roles as politicians, so you have
other avenues, in which you can address this in the
future.
Yeah. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission, and for
those insights. Uh, the, the Fisheries Act has certainly come up,
quite a lot throughout our submission process, so, we appreciate your
take and insights on it. So thank you very much for your time this
morning.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Look, members, that brings us to our,
short break, this morning. We will, take a 10-minute
break, and we will resume at,
10:12. Uh, just running a couple of minutes behind
schedule.
Well,
welcome back everyone to the Planning Bill, and Natural
Environment Bill hearings. Um, we move now
to our next submission, which is from
Hobson's Pledge, and we can see Hobson's Pledge
there. Uh, welcome, Stephen. Uh, you
have 20 minutes with us this morning.
Um, do take your submission as read, but look, we'll hand it
over to you to, talk us through the main points, and
then we'll open up for questions. So over to you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, could I perhaps speak first as spokesperson for Hobson's Pledge?
Oh, Dr. Don Brash, I didn't see you, there.
Welcome to the Select Committee. I'm sure you're very familiar with this
process, obviously. So, yes, we'll hand over to you.
Yes, indeed. Somewhat familiar. Uh, I'm here today as spokesperson for
the Hobson's Pledge Trust. As you may know, Hobson's
Pledge is an advocacy organization committed to
eliminating all forms of racial preference in New
Zealand. We take our name from the words allegedly spoken by
New, New Zealand... by, Governor Hobson as each
chief signed the treaty, namely, "We are now one
people." We have some 130,000 people on
our regular mailing list. We were initially
enthusiastic at what the coalition government was saying about RMA
reform, and we had high hopes, given that all
three parties to the coalition are on record as
affirming that all New Zealanders, no matter who they
are or when they or their ancestors came to New
Zealand, are equal before the
law. The National New Zealand First
Agreement signed when the government was formed stated that, and
I quote, "The coalition government will defend the principle that New
Zealanders are equal before the law
with the same rights and obligations, and with a guarantee
of the privileges and responsibilities of equal
citizenship in New Zealand," unquote.
The National Act Agreement
expresses the same sentiment. And may I just add that I
recall Mr. Peters giving a speech once in February
2017,
in which he said he pledged-New Zealand First's then 12
MPs in support of the then national government's intention to
reform the RMA,
he would provide full support for all the changes that the then minister,
Nick Smith, wanted to produce in that legislation
on the single condition that all reference to race
was removed from the legislation.
The same sentiment is at the heart of Article 2 of the treaty
that everyone has the right to their own property.
The bills as currently drafted
leave us profoundly disappointed.
Throughout both bills, those with some Maori ancestry
are given a preferred constitutional status in direct
contradiction to the values which the parties to the coalition
government profess. Our submission on the
bills, drafted with the help of our legal advisors at Franks
Ogilvie, recognizes that time is very
short
if this legislation is to be passed before the parliamentary term ends,
as the government apparently intends.
To this end, rather than merely expressing our profound regret
at what these bills currently provide, we asked our
legal advisors to make very specific drafting
suggestions
about how these bills can be amended so that they're consistent with the
principles that the parties to the coalition government profess.
These drafting suggestions cover seven specific parts of
the bill. If the government were to take up these suggestions
in substance, if not in detail, we'd be keen to
support passage of them both. If not, we will
do our best to mobilize public opinion against
them. Now let me turn over my time
to our legal advisors, and I gather Stephen Franks is there
on the, on the line.
Yeah. Yes, I am, Don, and,
as the committee will appreciate, both Don and I have
been in your position,
and we have a full understanding of how difficult it
can be
to generate material changes in bills, particularly if
you do not have, a, a committed secretariat
for that purpose, or you don't have the resour- independent resource for it.
But we think it is, is very important that
the committee, do take up the challenge in this
case. We fear that
the, the government
will incur all the costs of, another
attempt at RMA reform, which of course
generates a, an enormous resistance from those
who are vested in the industry as it stands and in all the
processes and the opportunities to, to block and
to delay. Um, and even they won't necessarily be working
with malign purpose. It is just the world in which they've been for the last three
decades, and they will see it as a
virtue to basically negate the
underlying intentions of this act and to maintain the current
situation. But we think that the,
amendments that we've proposed would go a very long way
to a- avoiding that,
sort of wasted cost of stirring up a- a- all the
hostility that comes when you challenge the status
quo. Uh, where-- whereas under the current
drafting, we would expect within a few years this
reform would be regarded as having been very
substantially, useless. It, it
has so many discretions and so many vague
and un, defined terms
that, that
sustain the existing, regime that
the industry that's built around resource management,
will be able to, re-restore it
despite the stated intentions of this bill and the--
particularly the policy decisions of the ministers.
Now, I don't want to take up our time on generalities.
I would hope that if any of the,
reforms proposed or the amendments proposed in the detailed
submission are confusing to you or that you, that
you use the opportunity to ask us what you would like
clarification on. Obviously, we won't waste the time if there isn't--
aren't questions. But, we think there are a number of them
involved difficult drafting
judgments.
Um, we're puzzled at the fact that you weren't offered this kind of
thing in the bill to start with. Uh, most of it, we think is a
res-restoration of orthodox legal principle.
There's a, a fundamental principle, that the-- has been affirmed at the
Court of Appeal, in the Bagent case, that a right
without a remedy is not a right.
And the alleged restoration of property rights in this bill
gives no, no
practical remedy for breaches. And there's no
practical remedy in the-- these bills
for, the current situation
where officials administering the RMA are
not really clear
just what weight they must give to iwi preferences.
We know that as a matter of practice in the prior consultation
arrangements, if iwi frown on something,
most officials around what-- New Zealand regard that as de facto
veto, and frequently councils don't even get to see a plan that
might have elements, object- objectionable to
the nominated iwi representatives
What is proposed here is an attempt to
remove that, that uncertainty for officials and to say your
starting presumption is equality before the law.
Uh, all representations on resource management matters should be on their
merits, not according to who you are a- and what you
claim by way of ancestry when you say it.
Look, thank you very much for your submission, and obviously,
very detailed in terms of where you, feel the changes need to be
made. Look, we will open up for questions.
Uh, we'll go to Steve Abel first.
Kia ora. Thank you, Madam Chair. Can you hear me okay?
Yes. Yes, good.
I wonder, given you take such a broad ambit to
begin with, and, as is your
organization's position that you f-
deny the extensive
academic and historical, research and jurisprudence
that accepts that Māori did not cede sovereignty,
and that Article 2 rights are about,
providing for the right of iwi Māori to sovereignty, tino
rangatiratanga. If we don't accept that
premise, which would, force
the Crown into a position of, going
against all evidence and all evaluation,
then should we also not accept
the proposals you're making for this legislation, given they
are founded in a tissue of myths?
Are you addressing this question to me or to Mr.-
Whomever would like to answer. That's sort of my first question, and then I have a
more specific one, if, if I'm permitted.
Well, of course, I, I totally and fundamentally disagree with your
statement. The evidence is overwhelming in my judgment that
Māori did cede sovereignty and knew they were ceding
sovereignty. I also understand this is the government's position.
The government has said we will not settle with any iwi which does not accept
the fact that the Māori tribe ceded sovereignty in signing the
treaty. So let's, let's agree to disagree on that
point, but it's a fundamental disagreement.
Can I, can I have a follow-up sup on that, Madam Chair?
Yeah, just a one supplementary, yeah.
Yeah. So the, the follow-up sup is that,
given the sort of ideological position that you ad- advance, which
is a form of, I would say, extreme neoliberalism,
the free market, capitalist exploitation of
resources, is the reason that
you are so threatened by upholding the
interpretation of the treaty which says that Māori didn't cede sovereignty and
therefore have a right to be involved in,
things that affect them in their rohe.
Are you threatened by that because it's a barrier to that free market
exploitation of, New Zealand
resources?
It has nothing to do-
All right
... with my view on free markets or otherwise.
It's a fundamental concept that is based on, on New Zealand's long
history that Māori did cede sovereignty in
1840 and knew they were ceding sovereignty in
1840. There's no other way of interpreting the speeches made at the time or
made again in 1860. But be that as it may,
let, let's not debate that question here.
The question is how can we make the RMA or the bills to replace the RMA
effective for all New Zealanders?
That's the-
We could ask Māori what they think about that.
Well, no, ask all New Zealanders what they think about that.
Winston Peters is Māori. He said we want no reference to
race in the legislation. And-
Well, he's an outlier in his community.
Look, thank you. We'll now move to Cameron Luxton, who has a
question.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, Steven, Franks, in your, in your submission, you
said, a comment of, how much weight to iwi
preference in this, legislation.
And reading through your submission, you've got a suggestion about
moving, Mana Whakaha- Mana Whakahono a Rohe
agreements into joint management agreements.
Um, could I just ask you about that?
And then I have a sup about
pre-consultation.
Yeah.
Thanks, Steven.
Max, Max-- I didn't introduce us separately, Max, you might, but Max
Pakinga-
Pakinga-Baba
Pakinga-Baba is, has, has done a lot of the detailed work
here. I'll just say overall,
the Mana Whakahono agreements, were expressly not
treaty derived. A- and the
provision for them to survive, and in fact, be ended up into, into
until the date of the bill,
means that we could end up with a whole lot of the country covered by
arrangements that are grandfathered and that negate the
primary intentions of the bill. But Max, you carry on.
All right. So with these, these arrangements, following on from what
Steven said, they, they don't reflect treaty settlements at all.
They were, as far as we can make out, a, a compromise to
get, an amendment to the RMA across the line, get the support of
te party pali. Uh, our proposal to change
them to joint management agreements has the simple effect
that if that is done, they can be terminated on
20 days' notice. Currently, these agreements, once they're in
place, cannot be terminated without agreement of the parties.
So you could face a situation where a, a local authority
agrees with an iwi on,
notifications for resource consents,
co-governance arrangements, et cetera.
They're replaced with a council that doesn't agree
to those arrangements, and that council is bound by
themRegardless of what the, the mandate from the electorate is.
So-
Forever
... for- forever, exactly. And so converting them to JMAs would
essentially make them subject to democratic accountability while
allowing local authorities that want to enter them to do
so, if, if that is helpful.
That, that does make a lot of sense. Thanks for clearing that.
And that, that does actually flow into my supplementary, which is, qualifying
pre-notification consultation rights. Like, what would...
like, this is in your submission, what would that look like?
So pre-notification-
So-
... rights in the new, in the new bills.
Essentially, we... I mean, our ame- our amendments in the written
submission, expand on this, but it would
be to... essentially what it would, would be to
limit the rights but also to,
clarify that these are
consultation rights. They don't, they are not required to be followed in the
decision. They are, they can h- the council can
hear from the relevant iwi, but it is the council's decision how
those are enacted in the, in the plan.
Um, but we also note, so there is a, a Treaty
principle, one that's been crafted by the courts r- that
the du- the, the principle of good faith that
requires consultation depending on the
circumstances. But the, the legislation
retains the general right for the public to be consulted, and
the iwi can be consulted as part of that process.
There's nothing in the, the Treaty principles, which are not even carried
forward with this bill, that requires special consultation
rights.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, look, we'll go to Rachel Brooking now for a
question.
Thanks. So this is really a supplementary, to the conversation
between, Don Brash and Steve Abel just before.
Um,
so
y- you're saying nothing should be race-based, and hapū
signed the Treaty, or chiefs signed on, on behalf of hapū, who are
entities that continue. Uh, so going to Article 2 of the Treaty,
but, you know, put sovereignty to one side, do you not, do you think
there is a role, in the
legislation that governs n- natural resources, which is what Article
2 is about, or you're saying no,
somehow this relates to race-based,
decision-making?
Well, I understand what the Article 2 said is,
Māori also have the rights which British citizens have long
had. Uh, you have the right to your property and, and
that, is, is sacrosanct as it is for other New Zealanders.
And the reference to taonga-
Yeah
... forest and fisheries?
It, well, it, it, to, to the, the properties which, which Māori owned at the time,
and they were listed at the time as, as, as land and, and,
well, in the Māori version, not forestry and fisheries, but nevertheless,
but land and property.
And so-
Does that respond?
... if those rights have been, not uphold, he-
upheld, those property rights, is there not a, a, then a reason
for hapū to be involved in, in natural resources planning?
Oh, I think when, when property rights were not upheld, we've had Treaty
settlements, and I've always defended those.
Uh, not everywhere.
Uh, well, I'm not aware of any settlement that I haven't myself agreed with.
And-
Oh, I didn't mean that. I mean, there were not, there have not been Treaty
settlements everywhere.
Uh, no. Uh, well, they're making good progress.
If I'm, if I might add that, Article 2
in its English form is classical property rights.
Uh, in its Māori form, it's a, a lovely,
if you like, a, a metaphorical,
description of what the old English judges
called the right of the lord in his manor and the peasant in his
hovel alike
have the exclusive decision on how their property is used and what,
whether they dispose of it or not, which was quite something quite
unique. In most European cultures, indeed in almost every
culture, the powerful have had the power to decide
to override the rights of the, the, the
weaker. And in, in this case,
you ask does Article 2 survive?
We say that it's been trashed by the RMA
repeatedly, and that Māori of
all people should have the right to claim that when they make decisions
about their land,
the, their neighbors don't have a right to interfere.
And that's what Article 2 was saying.
It, it's very obvious in the English version, and
it's, it's, there's a lovely metaphor it, for in, in Article
2 in Māori, according to Hugh Kawharu, Sir Hugh Kawharu's,
translation. And so the, the submission actually
says Hobson's Pledge would be happy
to see Māori rights to
the use, determine the use of their own land, free
from RMA type of style interference.
It would like to see that extended also to non-Māori.
But if there was a difference, it should be that Māori do
have, that privilege, 'cause it was a guaranteed
right. Uh, and, and that would be,
a distinction that would be uncomfortable.
Uh, but the Article 2 rights are what should have
been reflected in this legislation. They're not.
Artic- this legislation sets up, entrenches a whole lot of
arrangements for people to interfere, in the
l- land use decisions of their neighbors.
Look, thank you very much for your submission.
We have met time today. Um, we appreciate your
insights, so thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you
So now moving on to our next,
submitter today, we have Te
Runanga Nui o Ngati Porou.
Uh, tēnā tātou. Um, we have joined by us,
Matanuku, who was our lead negotiator for our
settlement, and also Horiana Irwin, our legal counsel for Te
Runanga Nui o Ngati Porou.
Brilliant.
Get Matanuku to kick us off.
Welcome. We've-
Thank you
... you've got 20 minutes with us, so, yeah, we'll hand it over to you to talk
us through your submission and then open for questions.
Tēnā koe, te Chairmana. Tēnā hoki tātou te, te komiti.
Uh,
e hui tahi nei me mātou i tēnei rangi.
We won't do a long mihi 'cause, we only have 20 minutes.
Um, but thank you very much for giving us this time.
Uh, one quick c***e- correction. I was a negotiator but not the lead
negotiator. There were a number of us.
Um, so I don't want to assume a station that I, I didn't
hold.
Um, I will open very briefly, and I
propose to, to cover three points.
The, the, the f- the first is to, touch very briefly on the
nature of RMA redress when it appears in Treaty of Waitangi
settlements. And, and the reason that this is important is
because the fact that there is RMA related redress does
not mean that there was an acceptance of an RM- of the
RMA, as being the source of any rights or
interests. All, all that redress does is recognize that that
is a, a mechanism through which natural resources, are
typically administered. Most Treaty of Waitangi claims and
settlements include natural resource related issues, and they
would be picking up on the discussion at the end of the last
presentation, claims to, to, to ownership or
something akin to that in respect of those resources.
Inevitably, it's accepted that you are not going to deal with any of those
types of issues through a Treaty of Waitangi settlement, so you come
up with another mechanism by which you can provide for
effective
participation by the settling group in, in the
administration of those resources, and that's where
those mechanisms are derived from.
So, so this is not something which is specific to the RMA.
It's actually the functions that they give effect to that are the
important things here, not the regime through which
those rights and those interests are given expression.
And that's important when considering any law change.
The, the, the second aspect of it, I, I think it's important also
to recognize that, a treaty settlement is not a, not
a simple transaction. Um,
it, it, it appears to me, and this perhaps is not a fair description of
it, but treaty settlements get talked about in, in
somewhat transactional terms. Um, people
forget the profound nature of a Treaty of Waitangi
settlement and what it represents.
Um, you know, the Crown talks explicitly about it restoring the honor of the
Crown. The settling group, the iwi or the hapū,
acknowledge that this is their opportunity to put the past behind them and to
move forward and to establish a new relationship and to,
to recreate connections with things that have been affected by
the settlement. I thought of it, to illustrate this, I thought I might tell a
brief story. I may or may not be able to get through it because I do get a little
emotional. Um, but this illustrates the point.
A key part of the Ngati Porou settlement was
our view that we had done our part as Tre- as a treaty
partner and the Crown had not,
and the, the way that we exemplified that was through a history of
military service. Going back as far as the Boer
War, Ngati Porou troops were heading overseas
and, and fighting for New Zealand,
and, Ngati called it the price of
citizenship, so expressing our role as
citizens of this country through the service of the country
in a military sense. Um, prior to the,
the, the initialing of our deed of settlement, my father, who
was our, our chief,
and others, we had been meeting for a couple of days
to finalize the settlement in Wellington. We were ready to go.
Initialing was the next day. I remember going home and he rang me up and
said, "I'm, I'm not going to initial."
Um, so there was a, a flurry of activity, a late night meeting with
Chris Finlayson. Um, he agreed to, to do that,
as did the other negotiators. And, and he told a story the next day
which, which talks to how profound these things are.
So, so, my, my father had four brothers that
enlisted for military service. Um, three of them
saw active service. One died in Egypt.
One died not long after returning home as a result of injuries that he
incurred in North Africa. Um,
the, the third brother actually had nightmares into his 80s,
as a consequence of his military service.
Uh, and m- because it was such a core part of our
settlement, I remember my father telling the story how he woke up at, like,
four o'clock or half past four in the morning.
He walked the streets of Wellington in the dark,
and the, the question that he asked himself is,
is, "Am I doing enough? Does this reflect
my brother's sacrifice on behalf of us and on behalf of the
country?" That's how profound a Treaty of Waitangi settlement is.
That's why they're not just transactions.
They are, they are, they are really significant
steps that iwi and hapū take in order to be able to
move forward and to create a better future for their
children and grandchildren.So, so when we look at the
commitments that are made in these documents, we need to look at them through that
lens. This is not creating iwi preference, which is what I
heard. This actually is about providing redress
and creating connections that were broken as a consequence
of, past Crown policies, and are
simply about restoring
a greater level of, of say and influence over the natural resources in a
particular area. And, and they, they mean something.
They mean something to the people that signed them.
Um, I know that the Parliament's changed, but we don't forget those
things. So that was, I think, the part that I was meant to
introduce. I'll pass it over to my cousins now to
continue.
E ngā puhi matua, mā tānuku o te rā te mā tahatou.
Um,
I have three points that I'd like to make.
Um, the first is just to just acknowledge that
whakaaro that Matanuku has shared, that sometimes we need to remember
to remember the importance of these things, and actually remember to remember our
own history in the context of when we're making and changing laws that are
fundamental to the rights of all New Zealanders, particularly hapū and iwi.
And in this case, we're here to talk about Ngāti Porou, so that's my first point.
Um, the second point is, and it follows on from the
importance of Treaty settlements more generally, but as a specific point
about the legal impact or legal,
effect of what I think has been
termed the Treaty Equivalency Clause, i.e.
the clause that says that, to the greatest extent
possible, Treaty settlements will be upheld.
Uh, that is dealt with at paragraph 29 about
submission. The key point there is that we say that's an
inappropriate caveat to the importance of the settlements that Matanuku
has just talked about, and that we have suggested some amended
drafting which reflects the responsibility of the Crown to
uphold the integrity of Treaty settlements in the context of these
changes. Now, that's actually a relatively straightforward drafting
solution that we've proposed. Um, of course, the policy intent
behind to the greatest extent possible seems to suggest that
if there is an inconsistency between a Treaty settlement and a
pathway that is proposed under these new bills, that the new pathway
will take precedence, and we say that that is inappropriate.
Uh, the third point is a specific technical point with respect to the
JMA that Te Runanga Nui o Ngāti Porou has with Gisborne District
Council over the Waipū catchment.
And so this is an existing JMA, so it would be caught by the transitional
provisions that allow it to continue.
However, our concern is that what hasn't been thought about in
detail is how that mechanism will transfer
appropriately across to the new system.
So of course, the JMA was designed, and
fiercely negotiated by some of us on the call.
Um, that was not an easy feat to get across the line with the Gisborne District
Council, but that happened in 2015.
That set up a whole framework, one of which was to co-design the Waipū catchment
plan with Gisborne District Council.
Now, of course, that work was underway, when it was directed to
be placed on hold in the context of these new reforms.
So the question there is just how do we give effect to, those
really strong mechanisms to ensure that when things are happening
within Te Toki o Ngāti Porou, they're co-designed with Ngāti Porou.
How do we ensure that that transfers over to the new system?
So those are the, the sort of three
points that I was going to make, two of which are quite technical in nature, and
happy to take any questions after, my cousin Kata has
spoken, so I'll pass over to her.
Uh, tena tatou. Um, and I'm bringing the planning
lens. So while being the chief advisor, I do have
20 years as a planning practitioner in the system.
Uh, so particularly around Ngāti Porou's interests, our
context is we are as large as the Auckland region.
We are the majority land holder within our region, and we understand
we have a settlement that should uphold those interests and rights
protected by the signing of our tīpuna of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. Um, that provides this committee with an
opportunity to provide bespoke solutions for Ngāti Porou
and our whenua and our taiao. Um, we have development
aspirations as well that this, these bills as
currently drafted do not provide for.
Uh, we have not been engaged as meaningfully
as promised in our settlement. Um,
and, and we have the solutions and the technical skills to,
to progress planning within our region.
So some of the aspirations that this bill is intended to address our
development interests, we are a community of
large, farming interests, we have forestry
interests, but we've also got complex environmental problems like erosion
prone land that this bill should be providing solutions
for and giving us the ability to lead those solutions.
Um, through that, I'll also reference Gisborne District
Council's, submission that is in support of retaining--
of providing for our Treaty interests, largely on the
back of the example that Horiana, has referenced, the
JMA, but also the meaningfulness of our settlement
in planning provisions. We've got the capability to do our own spatial planning, so
we're not opposed to spatial planning, but our submission
details significantly, some proposed
solutions, and lots of them are just, just wordsmithing.
And if we'd had had the opportunity to negotiate with, the two
ministers who have developed this bill, it appears in isolation of wider
cabinet, we'd be, we'd be happy to sit around the table with them and
find bespoke solutions for Ngāti Porou that references the
significance of our settlement that, Uncle Api and Matanuku
were involved in, in negotiations.
Uh, so on-- in thatUh,
like, we wanted to leave room for questions 'cause I'm sure on the back of the
previous submitter you've, you'd like to hear a counter
response.
Look, there we go, we've got lots of hands that have gone up.
Thought so. Kia ora.
Uh, kia ora. Look, thank you for that submission and, of course, sharing
your, personal story. Um, I will hand it
over to a question from Rachel Brooking to start.
Thank you. Well, just, that nice little segue,
if you'd like to comment on what you heard at the end of the last submission
and how that, affects Ngāti Porou.
Uh, so particularly in regards to Article 2 of the Treaty.
Um, well, I was just... I was tempted to put in the chat,
when there was a reference to Sir Hugh, and his translation,
I quickly brought that to the fore.
Um, so I would like to correct, so your, your instincts around the
incorrect kinda narrative as Sir Hugh's translation of Article
2, was, "The Queen of England agrees to protect the chiefs, the subtribes, and
all the children of New Zealand in the unqualified exercise of their
chieftainship over their lands, villages, and all their
treasures." I think we could keep going further, but I'll check
whether Horiana and, Matanuku.
Um, I, I can add a little something.
Uh, you know, the
treaty settlement and, and in fact the, the ongoing position of Ngāti Porou is
based entirely on Article 2. Um, you know, we,
we don't see that the things that we are wanting to have done are inconsistent with
that, or even inconsistent with what the previous submitter said.
Uh, as Keita said, we are the largest landowner other
than the Crown
within Ngāti Porou. We have extensive farming and forestry interests.
We are extensively involved in trying to deal with the environmental
impacts of climate change and the heavily
erosion-prone catchments that, are within our
area. A- and actually, for a large part, we get least to try and sort it
out ourselves. Um, and
so, you know, we... I don't see us as being inconsistent.
The, the thing that's inconsistent is the idea that this is a preference.
It's not a preference. It's about recognizing our
position as the people who have lived in that region for
centuries now, who own most of the land and have the most to gain and
lose by it being managed well.
Can I slip on that, Madam Chair?
Uh, y- yes, Steve, you go.
Thank you. I appreciate that, very,
restrained
explanation, I should say, and you're very good at that, Matanuku.
You always, bring that. Um, I do
have one clarification I'd like on the question of Article
2. Um, the previous submitter asserted and is
their assertion that, Māori understood in 1840 that they were
ceding sovereignty to the Crown. I wonder, is it
your interpretation that your, tīpuna were
ceding sovereignty, that they thought they were ceding
sovereignty? Um, and I wonder if you know of any
iwi or even hapū throughout the nation who take that
interpretation of the treaty or hold that view of their
ancestors, that they intentionally were ceding sovereignty to the
Crown.
It's aimed at me, is it? Um...
Whomever would like to answer it. Thank you.
Well, maybe if I answer it this way.
Uh, look, I th- I think sovereignty is an unhelpful word in this
discussion. Um, you know, talks to rights
derived from the sovereign. It's the, the origin of that, of that
expression. Article 2 is very clear.
Māori retained rangatiratanga, so chiefly authority over, over their lands
and positions and properties and taonga.
And, and that was never ceded. Um, you know, there, there is a, there is
a, a natural inconsistency between those two positions.
The, the, the Queen becomes sovereign, but the Māori, Māori people retain their
chiefly rights and authorities.
So, you know, if rangatiratanga means sovereignty, probably
not, 'cause it was retained. But, but I think that we get into
a... We're almost asking ourselves the wrong questions
by having the, the sovereignty discussion, because I think that that's an unhelpful
word in this context.
Look, thank you for that-
Maybe if I could, Chair, is just to add a comment from Papa Moana Jackson,
that actually any cession of tino rangatiratanga wasn't a
legal, was a legal impossibility at that time based on the way
in which, our tīpuna viewed the world.
So that's the only other point that I'd add.
Thank you.
Look, thank you. Um, perhaps coming to the, to the
bills and the, the submission, Priyanka, did you have some specific
questions in relation to that?
Yep.
Great.
Um, it was really a clarification.
Um, I think, Keita, I think you said that the engagement that you've
had with officials, and ministers didn't live up
to your expectation when it comes to these,
two bills. Just keen to get a sense of what
transpired and what would've been your expectation.
Um, so
there has been... I'll, I'll refer to our Relationship
Accord, which should dictate how, how the Crown engages
with us. Um, and that, that starting point
is that the Crown recognizes that Ngāti Porou assert that they have ongoing and
enduring ownership interests unbroken within the Ngāti Porou rohe.
They also recog- the Crown recognizes that the mana of Ngāti Porou in
relation to the Ngāti Porou rohe is unbroken and
alienable and enduring, and held and
exercised by Ngāti Porou as a collective right.
Um, further, point eight goes to the parties acknowledge that
any differences between them are best resolved through negotiation.
So the, the way we have been engaged with is, "Here's the
system-
We'll talk to you because we have to.
We think we're ticking a box here. That is not a
negotiation at all. Uh, there is drafting of a treaty
clause that my cousin Horiana has identified.
It's, it's not going far enough. We're having to have recommendations through a
select committee process that I think we only got
a space by chance, to even have this conversation with you.
So that negotiation and altering settlements,
the impact on our tribal territory, as I've said, the context
politically is very different for Ngāti Porou.
We're the main land holders, we're the main economy driving
anything within our tribal area. So that
engagement should be somewhat lifted
and, and it hasn't been. We've, we've had a cookie cutter approach that I think
every other iwi, and maybe entity has
had. Thank you.
Look, thank you. Uh, we'll now move to Cameron Luxton.
Uh, thank you and, and thank you Matanuku for that, the opening
stanza in this. It was very helpful framing for this discussion and my, my
question is to the same as to the previous submitter, but, do you
have... Do, do... It's around the, Mana Whakahono a
Rohe agreements. Did I hear you in your submission say that you have a joint
management agreement, and not a Mana Whakahono agreement?
Yes.
And, and why has that been the path you've taken, and what,
what sort of difference do you think that would, each one would give
you?
I might take this.
Horiana. Yep.
Yeah. So I was, alongside Matanuku involved in the negotiation
of the JMA with Gisborne District Council.
I mean, the quick answer is that Mana Whakahono a Rohe were not
available at the time that we negotiated, negotiated our
JMA, and I, as somebody that was involved in the
drafting of those Mana Whakahono provisions that found themselves
into, or their way into the RMA, the, the comment by the legal
advisor of the last submitter was inaccurate.
It wasn't a political compromise with, Te Parti Māori.
It was actually a response from or to successive
Waitangi Tribunal reports that said that JMAs were
not effective for the reason that you outlined, i.e., they can be
unilaterally, terminated by one party,
which when you enter into a contract with a party, in normal
situations isn't normal. Um, so the short answer is Mana
Whakahono a Rohe weren't available at the time that we negotiated our, our
JMA.
Thank you for that clarification. Appreciate it.
Yeah.
Th- thank you. Um, look, I just wanted to jump in.
I mean, there's many questions I could ask.
It is a, it's a really well laid out, submission with, with a lot of,
recommendations in it. Uh, but I just wanted to ask you about the
regulatory relief clauses because we've had some iwi groups
that have come in and kind of given us some alternative, solutions
there. But you're asking, and recommending to
remove them all, absolutely. Um, can you just
elaborate a little bit on your kind of reasoning and thinking, behind
that?
Uh, Horiana, do you wanna
talk to the regulatory relief
removal provision?
Sure. And look, we had this, um... Sorry, Chair, I'm just trying
to see where you are. Um, we had this debate within ourselves as to whether or not
it would be pro- appropriate to, um
proffer some amendments rather than to-
Mm
... set out a blanket opposition. Look, where we got to was
that the scheme itself is not appropriate in its current form, and so we weren't
prepared to, as we have in other provisions, provide drafting
to make what we see as a fundamental issue with the
bill a little bit better. Um, so that's why we haven't.
Um, we've got real concerns about the impacts of that scheme or the
proposed scheme for Ngāti Porou, where you have
effectively, um
... Well, I'll frame it in this way, costs coming back to the
ratepayers where we are a huge ratepayer within our
district, for situations that arise where we
say the council needs to be thinking about other options.
So that's our, one of our primary concerns in terms of, the
consequences, financial consequences on Ngāti Porou of the proposed
scheme.
Okay. No, no. Thank- thanks for your thoughts on that.
Look, we have met time. Um, really, yeah,
good thorough submission and, and, and really appreciate your time this morning.
So, yeah, feedback taken on board, so thank you.
Kia ora.
Thank you very much.
Tena tatou.
So now moving on to our next
submitter, who is Te Tai
Kaha,
and we've got a few, from Te Tai Kaha joining us
this morning. Um, I understand we've got
Kingi, Tracy,
Liz,
Mahina, and Richard.
So we will just wait, for them all to come
through.
Madam Chair, Tracy won't be joining us. She's heading off overseas.
Okay. Okay, but we have everyone else, with us
this morning hopefully.
Yes. Mm-hmm.
Welcome to the select committee. Uh, look, you've got 20 minutes with
us, so, there's a few of you. Um, so look, we'll hand
it over to you to talk us through the submission in terms of how you
want to do that, and then we'll open up for questions.
Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair, and tena koutou.
Um, so Te Tai Kaha is the collective comprising the Federation of Māori
Authorities, the New Zealand Māori Council, and former members
of the Kāhui Wai Māori. FOMA represents the
largest Māori landowner network in New Zealand of around
400,000 hectares of farming, horticulture,
properties, seafood and more.The New Zealand Māori Council
represents 16 districts and, and over
130 committees with roots stretching back to the early
1900s. Both these organizations
long predate post-settlement governance entities that have
been created since 1990.
I might just quickly stop you there because we can't see you.
Um, you-
Oh, sorry
... have maybe got your camera off.
So if you wanna just pop your camera on, unless that was intentional.
And the other one who we can't see is Anne Carter as well.
Um, so perhaps if you just wanted to turn your cameras on just so we
can see you.
Certainly. How's that?
There
we go. Yes, we can. We can see you now.
Perfect.
Kia ora.
Yes.
Good morning, everybody. So let me just continue on then.
So, so we work together on both resource
management and Māori rights and interests, and as, was
said today, the p- people that are on the call are Liz Mal- Mallas,
Deputy Chair of FOMA, Betsann Martin, who represents New Zealand
Māori Council, and our technical advisors, Dr. Mahina-a-Rangi Baker, Dr.
Richard Mead, and our secretariat, Anne Carter.
So firstly, the position of Te Kai kaha is that we clearly
support economic development and growth that is both
environmentally responsible, future
focused, and honours the Treaty of
Waitangi. For more than 40 years now, successive governments have
promised to address Māori rights and interests.
These bills do the opposite. They significantly prejudice
Māori rights and interests and weaken environmental
protection. We have three major concerns which we've outlined in our
submission, and I'll just address each of these briefly in
turn. Firstly, there's no legislative backstop to
protect our environment. The bills treat safeguarding
life-supporting capacity and protecting biodiversity
goals as optional, discretionally, and
entirely at the minister's mercy.
There's no binding requirement to actually achieve these
outcomes. The environmental limits framework does
not fix this, and as we outline in our written submission,
it leaves the environment very much exposed.
So Te Kai haha- kaha recommends adding a very clear
overarching purpose to the bill
to safeguard life-supporting capacity and to sustain
and restore natural resources for future
generations, and we specifically set out that detail in pages
five and seven of our written submission.
The second point I'd like to make is that these bills undermine the
Treaty of Waitangi and s- exclude key
Māori rights holders.
So to be clear, in this section of the act, we see this as much as
the treaty bill, treaty principle bill by another
name. And as we know, 90% of submitters oppose that
bill. The same logic applies here.
The current RMA clause has already been found to be inadequate by
the Treaty of Wait- by the Waitangi Tribunal.
These bills go further backwards, replacing even that weak
protection with vague goals that ministers can
overwi- ride at will. The environment is
a domain of deep cultural significance to Māori.
Making the treaty con- commitments contingent
on political interference is u- an attempt
to unilaterally rewrite the treaty.
It's wrong, and it's unacceptable.
The bills also fail to define Māori rights and
interests. They treat PGSEs and iwi
authorities as the only relevant rights
holders, ignoring hapū and Māori landowners as
the ahikā. They impose an artificial
collectivization of Māori rights that would never be
tolerated by non-property-- non-Māori property
owners. The result will be delay,
litigation, and cost for everyone.
So Te Kai kaha recommends a strong general treaty
clause, including a section sixtype
provision, as well as a broad inclusive
definition of Māori rights and interests, explicitly
including Māori landowners as
ahikā. And if you refer to section four point two, which
are pages eight to eighteen, there are detailed
drafting of appropriate clauses and recommendations for
that section.
And lastly, the third point we wish to make today
is that Māori freshwater rights and interests are not protected by this
bill.
The Crown has acknowledged Māori freshwater rights and interests.
It has committed to recognizing and protecting them.
These bills break that commitment.
There is no meaningful role for Māori in the care, protection,
use, access, allocation, or charging for
freshwater.
The Crown relied on its commitment to Māori rights
to enable partial privatization of electric-
electricity companies. More than a decade later, these
bills ignore that commitment
entirely. The Natural Environment Bill
claims to preserve Māori rights by asserting that nothing in the
bill affects them. But the bill, like the
RMA, directly affects those rights by controlling
allocation, renewal, transfer, and
charging. And now it goes further.
It declares that resource user charges belong to the Crown.
So we say, "How can the Crown charge for something it says it does not
own?" Especially when Māori rights-May include
proprietary rights, which has been, a position
that the Waitangi Tribunal has c-
confirmed. So this is not preservation, it's a fiction,
and it's a deception. The bills also entrench
first in first served allocation and grandparenting of
existing permits. This locks Maori landowners out of
fresh water access
and it blocks development of underutilised Maori
land. It's inequitable,
inefficient, and economically
irrational. This was an o- once in a
generation opportunity to fix allocation and
restore degraded waterways is being
squandered. And so Te Kaikaha recommends a
process
which we outline in our submission
as to how to manage fresh water more efficient and
equitably, restore fresh water quality and
quantity, provide certainty for all users,
and finally resolve Maori fresh water rights and
interests. We see this as a genuine win-win.
The bills as drafted, in our view, are a
lose-lose. And again, we provide specific,
pathway and recommendations in section 4.3.4,
pages 25, 27, as to establishing an
appropriate process. So in closing, Madam Chair, thank you for the
opportunity to be heard. We welcome your questions, and
we welcome any explanations why these critical
matters have not been a- addressed in the bills before you.
And our team would be happy to take questions
from...
Look, thank you very much for, that submission.
Uh, look, Cameron Luxton had his hand up first, so we will go to
Cameron.
Uh, yeah. Thank you, Chair. Um, I c- I
just in the, in your opening stanza there, I just heard, collective
property rights, which would be intolerable to non-Maori. What, what...
Just I have two questions. Just what was, what was that referring
to?
Well, the only, the only recognition in the act at the moment is-
Yeah
... for post-government settlement entities.
So they're the only-
Oh
... ones recognized as treaty holders, whereas Maori landowners
and others have been excluded, and therefore,
are not being consulted on any of these matters at all,
and they're in fact the treaty rights holders.
Okay.
So there's no question, if you look at Maori landowners, so to be really clear,
many of these organizations have had their land
pre-1840. So they've had-
Yeah
... un- you know, uninterrupted ownership of their lands, and now you're telling
them they have no treaty rights.
Okay. I appreciate that clarification.
It does make it clearer, and it goes to my sup, which was, another comment w-
this leads to the underutilization of undeveloped Maori
land. Um, and as you've just said, you've just sort of said this, there's
nothing, talking about Maori land that's not post-government
settlement, post-settlement government entities.
But goal 11-- Uh, sorry, in the, section 11
goals, F (3) , s- one of the goals of
this bill is to enable the development and protection of identified Maori
land. Um, does that, s- those
previous two, objections that you've just raised, are they sort
of, I mean, addressed by that one being the
goal, one of the goals of the Natural Environment Bill, which
is quite high up in the, in the
process?
No, it doesn't, 'cause it doesn't...
Again, as you've heard from a- another, of the other Maori presenters,
this is not the partnership that we see as now Article 2, Article 2
rights, which is what Maori landowners and others,
have as part of this. And so therefore, they need to be part of s- actually setting
the framework for how the rules are to operate in the
system, not to be told your goal 11
(3) or whatever it is, and then we'll
ad- address some of your issues, when we're ready.
So that is not this. This is about the specific recognition in the act
and that, the control, p- preservation, and all those
matters about controlling our fresh water resources is that we are
participating in that process at the
table, not as a receiver of, direction of
rules. Hopefully, that makes it a little bit
clearer.
Uh, look, thank you. We'll now move to Lan Pham for a
question.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for your very,
well argued
submission. And I wanted to ask the
question generally. I mean, you used the
term, that the Crown's constitutional Te Tiriti and
other obligations to Maori have been
eviscerated. And my question is
around the fact that we sort of, as a committee, we're hearing
these submissions
and we're, you know,
implications are so serious and so,
significant, but it's almost like we're sort of
treating them a- oh, as like another submission point.
And I guess my question is, you know, we've been hearing from a lot of people
that, you know, although the intention with these bills
is to go from a place of
so-called uncertainty to a place of apparent
certainty and more efficiency and this kind of
thing. But do you think from your
perspective, especially when it comes to
Maori and treaty rights and interests, that essentially
if the bills are not fundamentally changed in the ways that
you are suggesting, that the whole
system will essentially grind to a halt with
actually more legal challenges and more
uncertainty? Can you give us a flavor of what you
think the implications might be if we don't seriously reform these
bills?
Well, I think that the best way of, of responding to that is certainly that there
will be what we've suggested, and in fact one
Manawhenua, group is already proceeding
with court action about the a- commitment and the assurances that were given by
the Crown in 2013 on the sale of the hydro
assets. And that is currently before the courts at the
moment. So our view is that's definitely what will happen in this process
if we're going to be excluded in this way, and that action has already
been taken.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, for your submission,
today. I just had one quick question to ask you
around, some of the areas where you've talked about
water and the water allocation. Um, you've referenced-
Sure
... Tairāwhiti, Greater Wellington, Hawke's
Bay, the Bay of Plenty, and the Waikato.
Um, could you just maybe elaborate in terms of your,
you know, concerns and thoughts around that?
Because obviously, you know, these are ongoing issues.
I'm from Hawke's Bay here. You know, we're look, looking to,
you know, try and get some water storage projects up and running here.
Um, and, you know, of course these are complex, challenging pieces of
infrastructure, but of course, you know, good for the wider region,
in terms of, water security.
Uh, with, with climate change, you know, obviously a, a real
issue. Um, so I'm just wondering whether you can
y- you know, reference that, just talk to that a little bit more.
Okay. Maybe Richard, you might want to respond to that initially,
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so perhaps at a very general level, I
know Mahina Arangi, my colleague, can speak very much to the specifics.
Um, but in general terms, Te Tairāwhiti has identified a number of
institutional changes that, we think would represent a, a significant win-win
for all water users by creating greater certainty,
and reducing, litigation risk of the sort that,
Mr. Smiler has pointed to. Um,
the, the, the, the RMA sets up a mechanism that has a lot of features carried over
into the new legislation in terms of how water is managed and allocated and so
forth. Um, and fundamentally these things are, are based on a fiction
that water is unowned. This is, singularly unhelpful,
because we don't end up with efficient, definitions of water rights.
We don't end up with efficient tradability of those water rights.
We don't end up with, charging for, for water use in the way that we would for
any other natural resource. And so overseas parties can profit from New Zealand
water and not pay any royalty to any New Zealanders.
Um, these are all fundamental, deficiencies of the existing system that have
been carried over into the new legislation, and what we're proposing is some
alternatives that would lead to, more efficient water use, more
efficient, use rights, proper charging for,
for accessing water that can be used in a way that helps to restore the
environment, helps to, relieve over allocations and so
forth. So th- there's, there's a bunch of things that could be done to basically
improve the overall, way we use and, and manage our freshwater
resources. Um, but unfortunately we're missing that opportunity, as Mr.
Smiler has said. Um, but if, if there's something more specific that you're
referring to, Madam Chair, I can attempt to address that, but perhaps Mahina
Arangi, Dr. Baker, my colleague could do.
No, no, no, that, that, that's explained it from, from your view.
And I suppose, it is always challenging in, in, in regions where, you know, you
all want to work together, to obviously use water
as well as you can. Um, and and I suppose water
storage projects, get them off the ground as fast as we can
as well to obviously ensure that we have water security going
forward.
Well, I think, Madam Chair, that there's, many are supportive of water
storage projects, so we should be really clear about that, and I'm directly
involved in a water storage project in Tairāwhiti, which
is, not at the size of the scale of the Hawke's Bay ones, but it's still
30 million cubic meters, so it's quite a large project which
is, being kicked off shortly. So we're well
aware of those issues. That doesn't cut across the water storage
issues. Uh, we're supportive of that,
of water storage programs without question.
The fundamental issue is to deal with our treaty rights,
and that they need to be dealt with and addressed at, at the beginning of the
conversation, not at the end of the conversation.
And when we talk about the end of the conversation, we've now been over 40
years, and we still haven't started that conversation nor made any
real attempt to try and resolve it.
And we're looking to your select committee that can
finally put a process in place that allows the resolution of
that, or as, y- the previous member
asked, then, you know, that leaves little opportunity other than to
revert to the courts, and we'd prefer not to do that.
Mm. Okay. No, no, no. That clarifies. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thanks so much for your submission today.
Um, yeah, lots of, lots of points in there to take on board.
Uh, we really appreciate your time and, and you all coming on, on today with
us, so thank you.
Thank
you.
So we are now moving to our next
submitter today, which is Papāpūnamu, who I
can see has popped up there.
We'll just wait for them to, accept the prompt to come
through.
There we go, Dion. Uh, we can see you.
Welcome to the select committee. Uh, are you expecting any
other members at all to join you
or-
Are you sure you can hear me okay?
Yes, we, yeah, yes, we can hear you.
I was-
So Dion, is it just you that, that today?
Speaking, one of the call .
Okay, brilliant. Your audio's just breaking up a little bit there,
Dion. You might like to maybe move a little bit closer.
But look, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through the
submission. You've got 20 minutes with us.
So, yeah, if you maybe, talk us through the main points, and then we will
open up the
questions.
So ov- over to you, Dion.
Oh, can you, hear us there,
Dion?
Okay.
Oh, your audio, is just breaking up a
little bit
there.
And we look like we have got,
Kori- Koriana
as well
joining us.
Oh, there we go. Welcome, Koriana.
Morena.
Morena. Um, we've got j-- Is it the two of you,
joining us for the submission this morning?
Just the two of us, Madam Chair.
Okay, brilliant, brilliant. Oh, well, we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through the submission and then, open up for
questions.
Ka pai.
Well, kia ora tātou. Um, is my sound any better, or is it still
terrible?
Your sound is good. Very good, thank you.
Oh, that's, that's fantastic. Um, tēnei, tēnei maue tukua
atu e kia koutou i tēnei rā nei i te komiti.
Um, so we just thank the committee for this opportunity, to speak
to our presentati- pre-- our submission today.
Uh, we apologize, firstly, what has been submitted is,
probably looks a bit, ill,
ill-conceived and badly numbered.
Uh, but we acknowledge that, and if you do have questions, we ask that
you refer to the pages of the written submission, to help with
clarity. So we'll just pass straight to Koriana.
Uh, you will lead off our discussion.
Oh, morena tātou. Uh, just to reiterate what Dion said, thank you
for allowing us the time to speak today.
Uh, we'll take our written submission as read, and we, we won't delve into it.
However, we'll use our time to focus on the most critical issues, that we see
in our submission and the amendments that we believe are essential to ensuring a Te
Tiriti honoring and effective resource management system.
Ko wai a Papa Pounamu. Papa Pounamu is a Māori special interest group of the
mo- of the New Zealand Planning Institute.
Uh, we were established in 2012 with a focus on
Māori planning within the resource management system.
Um, today we bring meaningful integration of Māori perspective and planning
and decision-making. Our network of Māori planners and practitioners spans across
Te Motu, drawing on deep expertise, whakapapa connections, and
long-standing commitment to te ao Māori, iwi development, and
environmental well-being.
Uh, we work to support Māori planners, strengthen the wider planning
profession, and provide leadership grounded in te ao Māori to shape
Aotearoa's, Aotearoa-specific planning practice.
Our kaupapa is centered on ensuring that Māori rights, rangatiratanga,
kaitiakitanga, and mātauranga are respected and upheld across all
levels of planning in Aotearoa. Over the years, Papa Pounamu
has consistently advocated for resource management reform that is
clear, durable, and firmly grounded in Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. While we support reform, that improves
environmental outcomes and planning efficiency, we cannot support the Planning
Bill and the Natural Environment Bill in their current form.
They weaken the enduring application of Te Tiriti, rely too heavily on
procedural participation rather than substantive partnership,
and they place unacceptable risk on Māori rights, rangatiratanga, and Treaty
settlement outcomes. Uh, so with the formalities out of the way, I would like
to bring to your attention the first point that we have, which is the recognition
of Te Tiriti o Waitangi or the lack of.
Uh, under Te Tiriti, the Crown must actively protect Māori rights of interest and
authority over lands, waters, and taonga.
It affirms the authority of iwi and hapū of the aforementioned and requires a
Māori-Crown partnership through genuine engagement and shared
decision-making. I would just quickly like to remind this committee,
that the Crown is required to actively protect Māori rights and
interest in taonga, remedy past breaches of Te
Tiriti, recognize and uphold tino rangatiratanga over Māori
lands, waters, resources, and taonga alongside the full rights of
citizenship. Uh, engage in Māori through
meaningful consultation and genuine partnership, not merely procedural
participation, balance the needs of Māori and the wider community in
a manner consistent with equa- equity, reasonableness, and
good faith, and enable management of natural resources and
taonga in accordance with tikanga Māori, mātauranga Māori as an
expression of kaitiakitanga. Uh, but we believe the bills
undermine this by removing or weakening co-governance tools, such
as Mana Whakahaaro, JMA.
Uh, they fail to guarantee Māori seats on regional planning committees.
They see Māori as an advisory role instead of a decision-making
authority, creating new bureaucratic structures
where Māori have limited influence.
Uh, they rely heavily on consultation, not partnership, and they
centralize decision-making with ministers and councils,
and they provide no mandatory Māori representation on key
national bodies. This shifts from Māori partners-- or this shifts
Māori from partners to stakeholders, which is inconsistent with the
Treaty and creates a system where Māori can offer feedback but cannot
influence outcomes meaningfully.Uh, so we see the
problem that this bill replaces
the RMA's enduring Treaty framework with a single Māori interest goal
that sits alongside other goals. It carries no priority and
is largely procedural. They propose to undo progress
addressed and provided for through Treaty settlements through Clause 10.
Um, we believe this weakens Māori influence compared to the RMA
Section six, 6E, 6G, 7A, and 8,
and risk reopening historical grievance-- grievances and
destabilizing settlement outcomes.
Uh, furthermore, the impact that this has on Māori relationships with
whenua, wai and taonga are at risk of being traded off through national
direction limits and spatial planning, especially where values
aren't mapped. While most other things, this creates legal
uncertainty and shifts a heavy evident burden onto iwi and hapū.
Uh, we ask that the select committee consider a standalone Treaty clause in
both bills requiring all powers functions to give effect to Te Tiriti-- to
Te Tiriti,
reinstate RMA Sections 6E, G,
7A, and 8 into the Planning and Natural Environment Bill to prevent
regression,
and also amend Section 11, so decision-makers must give
effect to Māori interests, explicitly referring--
ex-- sorry, explicitly referencing ancestral lands,
waters, wāhi tapu, taonga, tikanga, and customary
rights. Treaty duties cannot be a preference or a process
step. They must be the operating system.
That requires a give effect clause, not a goal that can be traded
off. Um, I'm gonna quickly move into JMAs, Mana
Whakahaaro and technical advisory groups.
Uh, we believe that Māori should be built into the engine room.
Uh, what we mean by that is that
there is a problem with TAGs, that will shape the national
environmental standards, limits and allocation because there's no
requirement for Māori representation within those TAGs
despite the Māori interest goal. This makes some
structural gaps. Uh, we ask that the select committee
amend, the Planning Bill Clause forty-six
and the Natural Environment Bill Clause seventy to require
Māori-nominated num-- members with mātauranga Māori,
tikanga, Te Tiriti, and Māori land expertise.
Uh, provide for standing Māori TAG, w-with
published membership, terms of reference and advice, and
require ministers to show how advice is considered.
Uh, just quickly before I hand over to Dion, I'll just touch
on iwi hapū management plans, and Mana
Whakahaaro. Uh, iwi management plans
are still having regard to, which we see as a problem within the bill,
and lose practical weight once plans-- one-once plans,
environmental limits are set.
Mana Whakahaaro and JMAs are weakened over time,
limited, and Māori seats on RPCs are not guaranteed.
This dismantles co-governance pathways that have
worked. Uh, we ask that this committee recognize and provide for iwi
hapū environmental plans under both bills, that they carry the Mana
Whakahaaro and JMA forward with equal or stronger effect, not
merely to the extent practicable, and guarantee that Māori
presence and authority on RPCs require co-governance in both
bills. Uh, so that's me. I'm gonna hand over to Dion, who's gonna
take you through some of the other aspects within our, within our submission.
Thank you.
Thank you, Kuriana. And you might have heard our, our young baby in the background
there. So thank you to Kuriana for her whānau-based, input to this
submission. Kia ora, Kuriana. Uh, just talk quickly around
identified Māori land. Uh, so we acknowledge that this land
category is not new, having been used in the Natural Built Environment Act
previously. It's now used in Fast-Track Approvals Act and also the
Infr-Infrastructure Funding and Finance Act twenty-twenty, where
it's termed protected Māori land under Section eleven.
There's a conflict created by the inclusion of Māori customary and freehold
land alongs-alongside land that forms part of a natural
feature that has been declared a legal entity or
person. So this conflict is based upon the am-ambiguity
the bills create, where Treaty settlements assign clear mandates
about who exercises authority, how decisions are
made, and what obligations apply.
A clear objective of assigning legal personhood status on natural features
is that they own themselves.
They are governed and spoken for by governance regimes established via
Treaty settlements. Lump-lumping randomly associated
lands based on a Māori basis of ownership treats all Māori
land owners as a single group, which does not provide any
context or nuance around the different types of
ownership. Uh, now I'll, I'd look to,
Māori purpose zoning or proposed Māori, Māori purpose zones.
If these are introduced through, national zoning standards, we are concerned
that standardized zones for Māori purposes will be read by councils to
apply specifically to identify Māori land.
When viewed alongside the Crown's Māori interest goal, this defines and
constrains Māori development and protection aspirations to those
that are determined by the Crown.
In particular, we see Crown-defined interest as either involving
housing or papakāinga development or the protection of
biodiversity. So it's a binary concept and
approach. We must keep in mind that fifty percent of remaining
native plant biodiversity is on private land held in Māori
title, that Māori land has historically been subject to
restrictions on development for reasons such as lack of access to
finance and land with multiple owners.
Part of our submission, we talked about consultation
and that how there's been a limited targeted consu-- consultation with the
National Iwi Chairs Forum, Te Tai Kaak and selected
PSGsThe government has stated that the select committee
process that we are going through now is their preferred method of
consultation for this and many other bills.
Even this severely limited consultation has identified that new legislation
needs to be enduring and provide certainty.
In targeted consultation, clarity was asked for on
legis- legislative design principle nine, which was to
uphold the Treaty of Waitangi settlements and Crown obligations.
The question was whether the principle refers only to the Crown's obligations under
treaty settlements or the Treaty of Waitangi generally.
It is clear now that it is the former.
The token time-bound promises of clauses nine and 10 show
that the Crown's goal is to redefine Māori rights and
includes the undermining of statutory
acknowledgments, their status, and
effect. The separation of land and the
environment in the planning bill is an expression of ideology in an
arbitrary act of abstract thinking.
Again, this fits the narrative of the enjoyment of property rights
without either the bill, either bills defining exactly
what the enjoyment of private property is or how it is to be
measured.
Similarly, the Natural Environment Bill does not set out how the enhancement of the
natural environment is to be achieved.
The bills are largely silent
on the wellbeing of future generations and the effects of climate
change. These are all instances of a lack of political will driven
by a lack of courage. We have identified that bipartisan
support for a new RM system is needed which spans electoral
cycle.
Uh, we have made a number of...
into one with a clear, holistic, and sustainable
purpose, with one set of coher- coherent goals
based on well-defined outcomes for the environment
and communities. Providing explicit definitions of poorly defined
terms.
Including cultural indicators and methodologies for setting environmental limits,
national standards, and regulations.
Uh, that
monies...
In the management units they are extracted from.
Compensation through regulatory relief is coupled to betterment out-
objectives
and enhanced environmental and community wellbeing,
and that sites of significance to Māori are removed as a vector
for regulatory relief.
Provided for by those exercising or performing functions,
duties, or powers under the bill. And lastly, that national
standards provide for the zoning of land for Māori purposes
without coupling this to the definition of identified Māori land.
Our Papa Pounamu has a purpose of promoting the dual planning
paradigm. So Māori have undertaken environmental planning
and
there's nothing to prevent the two paradigms working together for the
betterment of all our communities.
Uh, to the committee, that's all I have at the moment.
I'm happy to take-
Oh, you seem to be freezing a little bit there, Dion, with your
audio. But, look, we will open up for questions.
Uh, we've got a question from Huhana.
E mihi ana ki a korua, Koriana, Dion, mo
to reo mo te Papa Pounamu. Um, thank you for coming
online today and articulating some clear key
messages. I've got a couple of pātai, Madam Chair.
First of all, I want to invite Papa Pounamu to share
with us whether they were engaged, 'cause your
technical-- You're a technical network, you've got skills in the
space, and you are representative of, of a, a group of Māori
who could contribute to the development of this legislation.
Was your rōpū engaged by Crown officials for the development of
this legislation, and what was the quality of that engagement?
That's my first pātai, and then I've got another one.
Kia ora.
Uh, Dion, did you hear that question?
Or perhaps Koriana, you maybe want to answer
that.
Yeah, just quickly. Sorry, Dion does have a bit of issues-
Yeah, yeah
... he experiences a lot of technical difficulties from where he is.
Uh, so kia ora for your pātai, Huhana.
Uh, the short answer is no. Uh, we weren't engaged
directly, but we have been engaged through the New Zealand Planning
Institute to provide some technical advice in that aspect.
Okay. Thank you very much. Kia ora. Kia ora tena.
My second question is around the narrowing of focus through
this legislation with that hierarchy of
the Māori, that will now be engaged into the
new system, and coming from a Whenua Māori perspective,
you know, a- and Marae and Hapu are very much on the
tools in the daily. Um, in that narrowing of focus
while elevating, those with treaty settlements,
do you think that it's prejudicial, to the broader
treaty obligations that the Crown has to
all Māori who participate in the
system?
I will try and answer that if my audio-
Yes, we can hear you
... audio connects in there. Yes.
Um, yeah, so re- redefining,
um-Treaty rights is to only those,
in Treaty settlements defeats the purpose.
Um, the Treaty of Waitangi does not confer rights, it,
affirms those pre-existing rights were there, that were there before the
Treaty. Um, there's definitely discrimination
in pr- privileging those who have undergone Treaty settlements against those that
haven't. The, those that haven't undergone Treaty settlements are left totally out
of the picture. So, hope that answers your question.
Koriaana, did you have anything?
No, not really, Dion. I think you answered that part so well.
Look, thank you. Look, I'm just gonna jump in with a quick question.
Um, it's point 96, where you talk about the
regulatory relief, and you give a
recommendation, about, if we're
going to proceed with regulatory relief that,
the sites of significati- significance to Māori and natural hazards are
removed from the regulatory relief framework.
So, obviously you're not, you know, saying
necessarily get rid of it all, but, you know, here's
potentially a solution or a recommendation.
But then how, how would you define that?
And why both? Why Māori and natural hazards?
Uh, yeah, so, so what we did recommend was building upon the existing
RMAB Section 85-
Section 85, yeah
... which provides for over-regulation through the Environment Court. Yeah, yeah.
So, so part of the reason for, leaving sites of significance and
natural hazards out there is that, it's all about the, the wellbeing of
communities. And we, we've asked for public
welfare, natur- natural resource preservation, healthy and cultural
living, and balanced development to be part of that solution or
criteria where regulatory relief might
apply.
Okay. Okay. No, thank you. Thanks
for that. Look, thank you for your time today, and your
submission, and talking us through all those points.
Uh, we appreciate it, and obviously navigating the technical
challenges as well, Dion. So, thank you.
Ka pai. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Kia ora.
Ka kite.
So we now welcome our next submitter for
the morning is, New Zealand Freshwater Sciences
Society.
Just wait for them all to come
through.
Mōrena.
Mōrena. So we have, Jennifer,
we can see you. Richard, we can see you,
and we're just awaiting Joanne
Clapcott, who we can see, but
just may need to accept the panelist
prompt.
I just-
And we can see Joanne. There we go. Welcome.
Welcome to the three of you. Uh, you have 20 minutes for your
submission today. So, look, we'll hand it over to you to take
us through the main points in your submission, and then we'll open up the
questions. So over to you.
Hi, tēnā koutou katoa. E mihi ana ki a koutou.
Ngā mihi nui, mō te whai wāhi, kī te tōku
kōrero i mua i a koutou i tēnei rā. Uh, ko Joanne Clapcott
tōku ingoa. Ko au te perehitini, o Ngā
Kōnga Wai o Aotearoa. Nō reira, tēnā koutou
katoa. Um, so hello, and thank you for this
opportunity to speak today. I am Dr Joanne Clapcott, president of the New Zealand
Freshwater Sciences Society. And as you mentioned, joining me online today
are our vice president, Dr Richard Allenbone, and our advocacy
and submissions officer, Dr Jennifer Price.
So we have a short statement to read, and then we very much welcome your questions
and continue this kōrero. So, our
society brings together more than 500 members working in
freshwater science and management across Aotearoa New Zealand,
including researchers, regional council scientists, iwi
scientists, environmental managers, and community
practitioners. Our role is to support the use of
robust science and mātauranga Māori in, to inform
freshwater melan- management and policy.
Our written submission sets out our detailed views on the planning bill and the
natural environment bill. But today, we'd like to highlight three key points
from a freshwater science perspective.
But first, we want to note that as a society, we're committed to giving effect
to the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi, and we share concerns
about proposals to narrow the scope of involvement of iwi and
Māori in the planning system.
Our first point today is about environmental limits.
Regional councils must retain the ability to set and enforce
environmental limits that are necessary to protect freshwater
ecosystems, community values, and public
wellbeing. From a scientific
perspective, prevention and protection is far
easier than restoration. Freshwater ecosystems
do not always respond gradually to pressure.
In many cases, they can absorb change for long periods and then
suddenly shift into a degraded state once ecological thresholds are
crossed. These are often referred to as ecological tipping
points. Once those tipping points are crossed,
ecosystems can become much more difficult,
time-consuming, and expensive to
restore.And we see this clearly in shallow lakes in
Aotearoa. Across New Zealand and internationally, shallow
lakes that accumulate too many nutrients can shift from clear water
systems to turbid systems, and once that shifts occurs,
it can be very difficult, if not possible, to reverse.
Te Waihora or Lake Ellesmere is a well-known
example. After shifting from a highly valued clear
water macrophyte dominated system to a turbid algal
dominated
one decades ago, management efforts over more than sixty
years have not returned this lake to its previous
state. Groundwater systems present a related
challenge. Because groundwater states, or because
groundwater rather, moves slowly through aquifers, contaminants such as
nitrate can accumulate gradually over decades.
In parts of Canterbury and Southland, nitrate concentrations in
groundwater have increased steadily over several decades.
This means the impacts of today's land use decisions may not
be full-fully visible for many years and once contamination
occurs, it can take a very long time to reverse.
These examples highlight a critical point for
policy. Freshwater systems often store and
accumulate pressures over time, and once ecological thresholds are
crossed, recovery can be extremely difficult.
So environmental limits are therefore essential.
They help ensure that pressures on freshwater ecosystems do not build to the point
where those thresholds are exceeded.
Protecting ecosystem health early is the most reliable
way to ensure that freshwater contamination, or rather
freshwater, continues to sustain communities, economies, and
ecosystems over the long term, and also protect
future generations from costly management and mitigation
actions. We note district councils such as Selwyn
and Angor are already looking at expensive water treatment programs
to address nitrate pollution in their groundwater sources.
For that reason, environmental limits should remain a firm and
enforceable foundation of the planning
system.
Our second point concerns what national monitoring's been, data's
tell-tells us about freshwater trends and the importance of recognizing
cumulative effects. The Ministry for the Environment's National
and, Environmental Reporting shows that many indicators of
freshwater ecosystem health remain under pressure.
For example, around fifty-five percent of New Zealand's river length
shows ecological conditions consistent with moderate or
severe nutrient enrichment based on national macroinvertebrate
monitoring.
Trends have been worsening at more than half of monitored sites over the past two
decades. Nearly half of New Zealand's
lakes show signs of poor or very poor health in terms
of nutrient enrichment, with conditions worsening over time at
forty-five percent of sites. And forty-one percent of
groundwater monitoring sites show nitrate levels indicating
accumulation of excess nitrate from human
activities, with concentrations increasing at nearly
half of sites. These patterns have been
observed consistently over many years.
The important point is that freshwater ecosystems respond to the
cumulative effects of many decisions, including land use
change, water allocation, nutrient inputs, sediment, and habitat
modifications. Individually, many
decisions appear to have only minor effects at the site scale.
However, when repeated across catchments and over
time, their combined impacts can become
significant. So to reiterate, many of the pressures
on freshwater arise not from one big decision, but from the
cumulative effect of many small ones.
The national data reflects the accumulative effect of these
pressures. And because these changes occur gradually,
degradation may not become obvious until ecological thresholds are
crossed. This is why the planning system needs to set
clear environmental objectives, establish limits that
reflect ecological thresholds, explicitly recognize and
manage cumulative effects, and support long-term
monitoring and accountability.
Without these elements, it becomes very difficult to know whether policies are
achieving environmental outcomes.
So our third point relates to policy stability.
Freshwater policy in New Zealand has undergone multiple major reforms over
the past decade. Each reform process involves extensive
scientific input, modeling, consultation, and planning at both
national and regional levels. And many members of our
society have contributed thousands of hours developing technical
frameworks, environmental indicators, and catchment management
approaches. However, when national direction
changes frequently, those processes are often
paused, reset, or replaced before environmental
improvements can occur.
So this creates uncertainty not only for councils, but also
communities,
and also for the science and monitoring programs needed
s- excuse me, monitoring programs needed to
support effective management. So a good example of this
is the Manuhere Hataânea catchment in Central
Otago. Scientists and water managers have been
working on water allocation issues there for more than thirty years.
Despite sustained effort, policy changes at both national
and regional levels have repeatedly interrupted progress.
As a result, long-standing allocation issues remain
unresolved. Consented water abstraction can still
exceed summer low flows, and some abstractions are
not subject to minimum flow provisions under the existing regional plan
dest- despite permits expiring under the RMA in twenty
twenty-oneResolving these challenges requires
careful planning, robust science, and long-term collaboration
between communities, iwi, and water users.
Frequent policy change also creates incentives for parties to
delay planning processes in anticipation of
more favorable future rules.
From a f- scientific perspective, environmental management works
best when policies are clear, durable, and supported
across political cycles.
Long-term environmental problems require
stable long-term policy solutions.
We would like this committee to encourage the government to carefully consider the
costs and risks of frequent policy change, and to avoid
policy settings that allow environmental limits to be overridden.
In our experience, such approaches ultimately prove counterproductive and
very costly. So in closing, we would like to
emphasize that healthy freshwater systems are not just an environmental
issue, they are the natural infrastructure that is fundamental to the
wellbeing of our communities and economies.
Improving freshwater outcomes requires clear environmental
limits, strong monitoring, and stable policy
settings. Ensuring that environmental management remains
grounded in robust science, mātauranga Māori, and the principles
of Te Tiriti o Waitangi will help deliver better outcomes for both
current and future generations. So thank you again for the
opportunity to present today, and we'd be happy to answer any questions.
Kia ora.
Kia ora, and thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, look, we've got a couple of questions, so we'll go to Lan Pham
first.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I first wanted to ask about the sort of
transitional period that we'll be going into,
post these bills coming into force, and, you know, you make it
clear from your submission despite multiple reform cycles, many rivers,
lakes, wetlands, and aquifers remain degraded and others will
degrade further as pressures
increase. Um,
if we don't have
sort of any
regulatory or limits pressure in the interim
between now and this legislation coming into place, whether or not it
actually includes, some
limits that might improve freshwater quality or not,
what can we expect from freshwater quality, across the
country over the next few years?
Kia ora, thank you for your question.
Um, and for all questions received today, I'll respond in the first instance and
then invite, our vice president to also respond if he's got something to
add. Um, your question reflects or perhaps highlights
the ongoing long-term trends that we're absor- observing in
freshwater in Aotearoa. Um, and they will con-
and there are some good news stories around the country where we've had significant
investment in catchments and communities, but on the whole, there will be
continue to be a long-term degradation, of our freshwater
resources and in particular, some of the, the endangered species
that rely on them. Um,
I'm s- I'm sure this panel, this committee knows that over three-quarters of
our freshwater fish species, for example, are threatened or at risk of
extinction, and we're very likely to observe some of those extinctions
unless we have a plan in place to protect the
ecosystems that they depend upon. Kia ora.
Kia ora. And can I ask another question, Chair, or pass on?
Yeah. Yeah. We might just go to, to Grant in the essence of time, and then we'll
hoot back if we have a few more minutes.
Thanks.
So, Grant.
Yeah. Kia ora. Thank you very much.
Um, I just wanna pick up on a point you made, how
the, degradation of the water quality, has taken a long
time, and actually it takes a while for the, nutrients and so forth to
flow through the, the aquifers and so forth to really have, to see the
impact. Would it not then conversely be correct to say
that if, as changes are made today, it's gonna take
some time for that to flow to get the improvements at out the other
side?
Yes. That is correct.
S- so therefore, when we're looking to measure and put limits in place, then,
we need to take that into account so we can give, give catchments time
to actually see that flow through.
Otherwise, you could have, you could g- go, you know, otherwise you could have,
caused a lot of short-term economic pain when you
actually are making the, the gains, but you won't see them for a
while.
And I think that speaks to the importance of having, a strong
environmental limits in place so that...
and, and those limits are based on the knowledge of the damage that's done and that
will continue to occur and the, and the time that improvements take.
And I'll also pass over to my vice president at this stage 'cause I see he has his
hand raised.
Yes, I see he's got his hand up as well. Yeah.
Yeah. One of the things I think that we see an awful lot of is if
you put the limits high, and what we're, we're saying to you
is if the, you know, you allow a reasonable amount of contamination, you might
think, for economic gain,
then when you want to reverse it, not only do you have the technical issue
of
is it reversible
and how much it's gonna cost you, you have an economic cost to the people who've
invested in, say, irrigation, stock, finding
that that's no longer permitted, and there's a very
difficult, community process to roll back
things. Whereas if you start with relatively
restrictive, um-
I think they're all spoken
... consent, limits, you can always raise them when you can see
over time you've got capacity in your environment to take more.
It's easier to increase rather than decrease and roll back, if that makes
sense. And that's what we experience in places like the Manawatu River, rolling
back things when there's vested interest in keeping them where they are, it's
incredibly difficult.
And, and just, um-
Thank-
You mentioned that, you're talking about Central Otago there, aren't you?
Is that correct?
Yes, that would be-
Yeah
... yeah, one example.
But w- wouldn't that, would that not be part of the solution here?
Why, why couldn't you, for example, just create a bigger water
storage to create so you got more water in the system
and therefore have, to keep the minimum flows where they need to be?
Why couldn't you do that?
A, you don't have the water. You can't store what's not there.
Well, um-
B, in the case of Manaherekiore, the upstream
catchment is the only habitat for one of our native fish.
The first 12 kilometers for the existing storage is the only place the,
Manaherekiore alpine galaxid lives in the world.
You raise that storage, you permanently lose some of that fish
habitat. Um, and the other part of it
is,
yeah, it's purely rainfall. They've looked at the Clutha River and cost
issues. The, it's not that simple.
Well-
There is water you could store, but you can't do it without an, a permanent
environmental impact.
Well, but that would, that would apply to any storage facility anywhere including
all our hydro dams, wouldn't it? I mean-
Yeah, but they're not as-
But that's always the com- the, in this space, it's always the compromise you need
to consider and work through.
Mm.
Because, you know, if we want economic activity along with fresh water, good fresh
water outcomes, there's always going to be a compromise.
I... Yeah, what we're saying is though that if you
start with relatively low use,
it's, you can always push it up. Putting it back down,
as Joanna said, reversing things when you realise you've gone too far is
incredibly expensive, costly, time-consuming and
difficult. So you, you, if you set things too
high, you're stuck with it for like, Lake Ellesmere, for
centuries.
Okay. Look, thank you. We're just gonna hop back one last question, Lan, and
then we'll have to wrap it up.
Yeah. Thank you so much. Um, I wanted to pick up on just
two parts of your submission where you encourage us to
apply the precautionary principle and also
explicitly recognise freshwater
habitats. What, in what kind of places of the
bill do you think it could work where there is an
explicit acknowledgement of both of those things?
Like, is it at the goals? Is it in methodologies?
Where do you think?
I'm not sure if I'm best placed to answer that, not being a policy
expert, so apologies. Um, can I welcome Richard or Jen
perhaps to comment?
I would've thought, you need some of those parts in the objectives, Lan.
The, they are, if that's the, especially
the treaty obligation bits, that
it's, and, you know, a resource management with respect to the treaty as
well was part of an overriding part of it, not sort of a little
subsection, would be my personal
take on it.
Look, thank you very much, all of you for your
submission today, and those, different considerations and
insights. We appreciate your time, so thank you.
No doubt.
So we now welcome through, our next submitter,
Geoscience Society of New
Zealand.
Can you see me? Can you hear me?
Um, we can hear you, Bruce, but we cannot see you just
yet. Uh,
maybe just see if your camera
is working. Pop that
on.
Oh,
dear.
I don't seem to be getting the camera on, I'm afraid.
Okay. Um, Bruce, just in the essence of time,
if you can't, obviously do the camera, do you
want to perhaps just start with your submission, talking
us through the main points? Um, you've got 20 minutes, and
we'll, open for questions.
Uh, okay.
So we'll just hand it over to you first, Bruce.
Okay.
If you wanna, if you wanna go through it for us.
Uh, in our submission we had a, an attachment that
was a document that had a number of visuals in it that, showed
what geoheritage in New Zealand is.
And also I believe we sent two booklets,
that may have been sent around to some of your, or all of your committee
members. One labeled Precious Land, and one named Cast in
Stone. Uh, some of you may have had those, and if you'd
flicked through them you would get a better idea of what New Zealand's
geoheritage, really is. New Zealand
geoheritage, together it documents the history of New Zealand and
its biota, from 500 million years ago through to the
present time, and that's what we're talking about here, New
Zealand geoheritage. Now, one of the stated goals in
the two bills is to protect from inappropriate
development the identified values and characteristics of
outstanding natural features and landscapes, and this is more or less the same
wording as in the RMA Clause 6B. One of the
aims you have of the planning bill is stated to be to increase
consistency between council plans across the country
through greater standardization.
At the present time, we submit that the protection of outstanding natural
features in New Zealand under the RMA Clause 6B, which will be
carried over into the two bills, is highly
inconsistent across the country.
Dare I say shambolic.Some councils
who started scheduling ONFs, outstanding natural features, for protection
in the 1990s used the originally intended definition
as outstanding geological features, landforms and physical
systems. There are at least 653 of these
geo-heritage ONFs in existence and schedules
around the country. However, increasingly, other
councils have started using a landscape definition, with
ONFs defined as small landscape features.
As a result, some councils have combined ONFs with
ONLs and now calling them ONFLs,
outstanding natural features and landscapes
together. As a result, some councils have now
dropped their ONF protection of geo-heritage, and others have
invented schedules with lower levels of protection or no protection
at all, called things such as, in their schemes or in the
district plans, geo-conservation areas, significant
geological features, geological sites, geological preservation
sites.
There are at least 137 of these in existence, with others in the
pipeline. But there is no legislated requirement to have
them nor protect
these new categories. So why does it matter?
This is our point five in our submission.
It matters
because if the trend towards calling small landscape
features ONFs, there will no longer be any planning
protection for geo-heritage in New
Zealand. It matters because landscape
and geo-heritage are quite different things.
They are assess- are assessed by quite different
specialists, landscape architects and geoscientists,
who seldom have expertise in both areas.
They are assessed using quite different
criteria, with landscape being assessed based on
its overall appearance with human perspectives of values
which can be quite subjective, and geo-heritage
being assessed based on the scientific value, rarity and aesthetic
touristic values.
Landscapes are mostly far larger and more robust than
geo-heritage features. The objectives and
rules applied to protecting landscapes should be quite
different from those protecting geo-heritage features, as is
now stated in the planning bill, to protect the identified
values and characteristics of ONLs and
ONFs. ONFs are more varied in
character and size than ONLs. Even within
w- within ONFs, one set of rules does not fit
all, as recognized in the Auckland Unitary Plan,
which has different values for allowed activities such as earthwork-
earthworks, buildings, et cetera, for eight different
categories of ONF in their activity table.
Large, robust landforms, large, robust geological
sites, small, fragile landforms, small, fragile geological
sites. For lava caves, volcanoes and active physical
systems all have different activities allowed and permitted or requiring
consents
based on their particular character's values and
size. There has been a tendency in recent years
for councils to combine ONFs and ONLs
and use only landscape assessment criteria for both and have one
set of rules for permitted activities no matter what the values
or size of the landscape or
feature. Although they may be
scheduled, some smaller geological exposures of landform features have
effectively no protection at all as a result of rules protecting just the
large landscapes applying to them.
So our submission is that for these reasons, councils and planners
need to know what is meant by an ONL and an ONF
in the planning bill, and it should be consistent.
A definition of an ONF and maybe also an ONL is
essential, we believe, in the planning bill, clause three, number one in
that bill. Just as there is a definition in there for historic
heritage, but there's no definition of what a ONF or an
ONL is.
We submit that the simplest solution would be to use a definition for
ONFs as originally intended in the RMA when
drafted, but not stated, as geological sites and
landforms. These would equate to the assessment criteria,
objectives and rules in TLAs such as the Far North,
Whangarei, Kaipara, Auckland, Waitomo and
Tasman. Where councils have interpreted
ONFs as small landscapes, they have often used the combined term
ONFL,
and these can easily be equated back to ONLs, being landscapes of
any size. There would be no ch- need to change assessment
criteria, objectives or rules for these.
So for simplicity and ease of understanding, we propose the following definition
for outstanding natural features, being geological sites,
landforms and caves of outstanding scientific, educational,
cultural or aesthetic significance.
That's our point six point three point one in our submission.
There are a number of definitions for ONLs available,
such as that from the Environment Court that we have in our point six point three
point two. But we leave that up to you or to the landscape architects
to decide what would be best there. Thank you very much.
I'm open for questions. And I apologize for the lack of a picture
Thank you very much, Bruce, for your submission.
Uh, look, we'll go to Cameron Luxton first for a question.
Thank you, Chair. And, Bruce, can I just, first by thanking you for
your Out There Learning channel. That is a fantastic thing that I
think I must have watched every video.
I've showed it to my kids, my nieces and nephews.
We really enjoy it, so appreciate you doing that.
Um, andSo my questions on this,
I've gone to your, to the Geopreservation Society map,
where it's got o- what, what I assume would become overlays
in a planning or, a, in a spatial
plan based on your description of
outstanding geological features. Have I got that right?
It's been referenced in your sele- in your submission.
Yes.
Uh, is that-
No, you haven't ex- you haven't exactly got that right.
We started that inventory of outstanding, geological sites and
landforms before the RMA even came up, so it had no intention of
being taken directly from there to the RMA.
Okay.
And so when schedules are put forward, geoscientists go
through that, and they have eliminated large, some
large sites, some sites that we believe don't need that legal protection and, and
limited it to those that are r- more susceptible to, to
damage.
Okay. Is there a me-
So it's the basis... Yeah.
Is there a measure on that, on that map tool that,
toggles down that, that level of recognition?
As you say, you've been doing it since before 1991, compiling these.
But, just to get a clear sense of what you're asking because looking at
some of this stuff I, I surpri- I'm surprised at some things that are
purple or pink and some things that
aren't.
Uh, no, we haven't done that assessment.
We believe it's up to the regional councils or the district s- councils
to, to, have that done for them and to
refine the mapped areas. We virtually did that as a
voluntary, exercise by all members of the geoscience
community, over the years, and built up that,
uh-
Okay
... inventory and its maps with its documented values, et cetera.
It's merely a matter of then saying what should go into the
schedule and what shouldn't. And you will see that some of them are very large
features, and they would be captured by landscapes as well, and we wouldn't
need to have them as ONFs.
Okay. If I may just final su- Um, your, your clarification of
what you would put in as outstanding,
how, how would the committee assess that based on...
You know, I, I thought maybe I'd be able to find it, looking at this.
Like, how would laymen who have only got an education in geological sciences
watching your YouTube channel, understand what outstanding is in
this scenario?
Well, most of the c- councils have contracted a landscape
architect to produce their,
and identify and assess their outstanding landscapes.
And then some of the councils have contacted a geoscientist to do it for
their, their geoheritage ONF.
So that's where they would then provide that information and
reports on what's outstanding and what the values are that should be
protected, which is what the planning bill talks about.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Lan Pham for a
question.
Tena koe. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wondered about if you had any comments,
about... We've heard a lot of concern
about the potential for the regulatory relief
provisions to have a chilling effect
on councils actually protecting various
matters. And, I guess the concern
is that, various landscape
features,
councils may be less likely to identify them,
if they have to then compensate the, the
landowner. And there's been, a question that's been raised
about, whether these potential
regulatory relief compensation clauses
are retrospective. And
basically my interpretation as it stands in the bill is
that they're not necessarily retrospective in terms of
going backwards, but when features like
outstanding natural landscapes, or whatever the terminology
used, are moved through into the new
system, that some of aspects of those could be
subject to regulatory relief. Do you have any,
comments or concerns about that?
Uh, I have concerns on both sides, I guess, or comments on both sides.
It may have some good points which...
And it may have some bad points, particularly with larger features and larger
landscapes, of course. So we ha-- I recall a c- a case not so
long ago about Crater Hill in Papatoetoe, which is an ONF in the
unitary plan, and, they wanted to subdivide and put
in 500 houses in the crater there, which is the best
example of an explosion crater in, left in the Auckland volcanic
field. And I felt very sorry for the landowner, when
the Environment Court sort of said, "No, you can't do this," but the landowner
still has to pay rates at the, at the going rate, and I felt he
should have had some rates relief, for example, to help,
him, keep, keep the land and open space there.
Uh, many of the outstanding natural features are quite small.
Uh, some are only one or two meters across, and so I don't know, in those
instances, that any relief may be needed.
Uh, in fact, that's one of the problems with not having a definition, is that
landscape protection in, in district plans, et cetera,
allows for often earthworks of up to 10 or 20 cubic
meters. And so in one half hour some of our outstanding natural features
could disappear without even having to be, get any sort of resource
consent if they're not scheduled.
Not sure I answered your question completely, but...
Look, thank you. We've got time for one last question from Grant
McCollum.
Yeah, you know, fascinating presentation.
I, I didn't realize the, the difference between the two.
And I note your, mang- Mangawhai Heads.
I always wondered what that, is it the haloi site was when I went out there.
Oh.
It's quite, it's quite, quite a unique feature.
It is, yes, but most people think it's just a dump, a, a white material that
should be, bulldozed away and made into three more car parks,
eh?
Actually, don't, yeah, don't, don't laugh.
That's actually probably exactly what they think.
Um, the, but in, in all seriousness, so
w- so what are the... Obviously the fact that there's been a confusion around the
definition and o- across the country, is that, is that leading
to destruction of things like the, potential, the Halite site in
Mangawhai, for example, simply because people don't respect the s-
the, don't understand what we're dealing with-
Absolutely
... and because the definition's got, definition's gone to more landscape than
actual smaller-
It's, yeah
... features.
The definition has changed, over time, but that's
because there was no definition, and still is no definition of an ONF
or an ONL in the, the RMA or the s- these particular
bills.
Mm.
So without that definition, the landscape architects and the
planners have thought, "What are ONFs?
They must be just small landscape features." So yes, this, this
has related, resulted in this.
Uh, in the Dunedin City Council area they had Folden
Maar,
and we were wanting it to be an ONF, but it's just a fossil site in a big
open paddock. And if it had been listed as an ONF or
scheduled as an ONF in the district scheme, the overseas
company that wanted to come in and mine it, the diatomite, and send it overseas as
pig food, would never have considered that that would, would be
allowed. It was only when they put in the application, put in plenty of
money to get... And then they discovered, oh, it's got some international
significance as these magnificent fossils, and there was so much
uproar, from the public and the-
Yeah
... ratepayers that it forced the Dunedin City Council, in fact, to
actually buy it. They wouldn't have had to spend one or $2 million to buy that
property if it had been a scheduled as an ONF, and it would've signaled
that this has got real special values.
Thank you. A very, very constructive and, thoughtful submission.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you very much, Bruce, for that submission today,
echoing the others as well, very insightful.
So we appreciate your time, Bruce, and for the time you've spent in
putting your submission together for us. So thank you.
Thank you.
Look, members, that brings us to the end of our morning session.
We are now going to break for lunch, until
1:10 PM when we will resume.
So thank you.
Very generous today, Madam Chair.
Oh, yes.